



Chalumeau - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Music for the chalumeau








3
Timbre and tone








4
Historical and modern chalumeaux








5
Similar instruments








6
Notes








7
References








8
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Chalumeau



20 languages




CatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEspañolEsperantoEuskaraFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoMagyarNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPortuguêsРусскийSimple EnglishSuomiSvenskaУкраїнська

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Woodwind instrument; predecessor of modern clarinet
This article is about the historical musical instrument. For the register on the clarinet that is named for this instrument, see Clarinet § Range.
ChalumeauA Modern School ChalumeauWoodwind instrumentClassification
aerophoneHornbostel–Sachs classification422.211.2(single-reed aerophone with cylindrical bore and fingerholes)Developedfrom earliest single-reed instruments, in which the sounding-reed and fingerholes were cut into the plant stem. In late 17th, early 18th century became a detached single-reed mounted on an instrument body of wood.[1]Related instruments
heteroglot reed: clarinet
idioglott reed: arghul, diplica, dili tuiduk, dozaleh, cifte, launeddas, mijwiz, pilili, Reclam de xeremies, sipsi, zammara, zummara
Sound sample

The chalumeau (English: /ˈʃæləmoʊ/; French: [ʃa.ly.mo]; plural chalumeaux) is a single-reed woodwind instrument of the late baroque and early classical eras.  The chalumeau is a folk instrument that is the predecessor to the modern-day clarinet.  It has a cylindrical bore with eight tone holes (seven in front and one in back for the thumb) and a broad mouthpiece with a single heteroglot reed (i.e. separate, not a continuous part of the instrument's body) made of cane.[2]  Similar to the clarinet, the chalumeau overblows a twelfth.

Chalumeau by Klenig (early 1700s), M141 Scenkonstmuseet, Stockholm. NB: There is no reed on this instrument.

History[edit]
The range of chalumeaux including bass, tenor, alto, and soprano examples.Chalumeau, illustrated in Marin Mersenne's Dictionary of 1636. These are stalks of wheat with attached (idioglott) reeds and fingerholes in the plant's stem.
The word chalumeau first begins to appear in writing during the 1630s, but may have been in use as early as the twelfth century.[3]  Several French dictionaries in the sixteenth century use the word to refer to various types of simple, idioglot reed-pipes all with tone holes. The heteroglot style reed (detached from the reed-plant's sidewall) was later adopted in the seventeenth and into the eighteenth centuries.[4] These single-pipe instruments probably evolved from earlier multiple-pipe instruments through the abandonment of the drone tube.[5]  (See Similar instruments, below. The etymology is discussed in detail at Shawm#Etymology.)
The use of the chalumeau originated in France and later spread to Germany by the late seventeenth century.[4]  By 1700, the chalumeau was an established instrument on the European musical scene.[3] Around this time, well-known Nuremberg instrument maker Johann Christoph (J.C.) Denner made improvements to the chalumeau, eventually developing it into the Baroque clarinet. The chalumeau is distinguished by two keys (thought to be added by Denner), which cover tone holes drilled diametrically to each other. The position of these tone holes prohibits the instrument from overblowing, limiting its range to only twelve notes.[3] In order to counteract the limited range, multiple sizes of chalumeau were produced ranging from bass to soprano.[4]
Over a period of about 20 years, the clarinet became distinguishable from the chalumeau due to a number of structural improvements. The first and most important development was the displacement of the rear key up towards the mouthpiece.  Denner also reduced the size of the hole and inserted a small tube to facilitate overblowing, greatly increasing the range of the instrument to nearly three octaves. The instrument was also lengthened to increase accuracy of tuning, the recorder-like foot joint of the chalumeau was replaced by a bell similar to the oboe, and a key on the lower joint was eventually added to sound a b’.[2] This new instrument eventually became the Baroque clarinet and specialized in the higher clarino register, as opposed to the lower chalumeau register. In its early development, the clarinet could not be tuned across the range of the instrument, so the chalumeau was still used for music in the lower range. Later developments in the key work allowed better intonation throughout the range of the clarinet, and the chalumeau register on the clarinet eventually rendered the chalumeau itself superfluous.[3] The limited range and modest strength of sound compared with the clarinet made the chalumeau increasingly impractical.[3] By 1800, the chalumeau had disappeared from the repertoire entirely and the clarinet was well-established on the European musical scene.
These improvements are attributed to J.C. Denner, but may have also been an invention of his son Jacob Denner who was trained by his father. Another son, Johann David, helped with the business but is not recorded as an instrument builder.[4] The Denners were the only instrument builders to produce both chalumeaux and clarinets.

Music for the chalumeau[edit]
Fingering chart from Museum musicum theoreticalo practicum, 1732.
Composers initially favored the chalumeau, but the clarinet soon overtook it in repertoire and ubiquity. Estienne Roger in Amsterdam published a set of duets for two chalumeaux in 1706 (prior to the first duets for clarinet). And in 1716, the same publisher released six volumes of duets for chalumeaux.[3] In the first decades of the eighteenth century, the chalumeau was especially popular in the Habsburg court, as evidenced by chalumeau parts in over forty operas and oratorios, and the Denners had many orders for chalumeaux from royalty all over Europe.[4]  Composers Fux, the Bononcini brothers, Zelenka, de Rossi, Vivaldi, Telemann and Hasse wrote for the chalumeau but chalumeau parts were not common in the second half of the century. Graupner wrote extensively for all sizes of chalumeaux and featured the instrument, often in groups of two or three, in numerous Ouverture-Suites, Concertos, Church Cantatas and Trio Sonatas. During the brief revival of chalumeau after 1760, Florian Gassmann included a chalumeau part in two pieces, and chalumeau parts were included in several ballets in the 1770s. But later renditions of these pieces transposed the chalumeau parts to clarinet or flute.[3] The chalumeau was often included in music dictionaries until the early nineteenth century.[4]

Timbre and tone[edit]
The chalumeau sounds much lower than one might expect, due to the acoustical nature of a cylindrical stopped pipe.  It has an intimate, cantabile-like quality – as opposed to the trumpet-like sound of the Baroque clarinet – and is very similar to the sound of speaking.[3]

Historical and modern chalumeaux[edit]
Chart of the eight historical chalumeaux that are still in existence today.
About ten original chalumeaux are extant, but modern craftsmen produce replicas based on these original instruments. Of the original instruments, most are made of boxwood and all feature two keys placed opposite each other to be played by the thumb and first finger of the left hand. The mouthpieces of these instruments usually have the reed placed on top so that it vibrates against the upper lip when played.[4] The surviving chalumeaux were made between the beginning of the eighteenth century and about 1760 by five known instrument makers including J.C. Denner, W. Kress, Liebau, Klenig, and Muller.[4] Of these instruments, there is one soprano and one bass chalumeau, several tenor and alto chalumeaux, and one rare chalumeau d’amour (aka Mezzo-Soprano chalumeau). The chalumeau d’amour has a bulbous bell like its rare contemporary the clarinette d’amour (aka "Mezzo-Soprano Clarinet") and the modern-day English horn or "Alto Oboe".[3]
Present day makers of replica chalumeaux include Peter van der Poel, Andreas Schöni, R. Tutz, François Masson, and Guntram Wolf.[citation needed] Other makers, including Tupian, Hahl, and Kunath, produce modern adaptations of the chalumeau.[6]

Similar instruments[edit]
Similar single-reed folk instruments with single, cylindrical tubes are found in many Arabic and European cultures throughout history. Examples include the albogue,  alboka,  diplica,  hornpipe, pibgorn, and sipsi. 
In England, by 1698 a similar instrument was known as the mock trumpet.[7] The mock trumpet predated the chalumeau and may be one of the primary predecessors of both the chalumeau and  clarinet.[4]
A similar instrument called the xaphoon (also called "Maui bamboo sax" or "pocket sax") was developed by Hawaiian craftsman Brian Wittman. A similar instrument called the venova was created and sold by Yamaha Corporation in 2017.

Notes[edit]
The name 'chalumeau' is used by European organ-builders to denote an eight-foot short-resonator organ stop used for color effects. This was first encountered in the organ of the Frauenkirche at Dresden and was built by celebrated organ builder Gottfried Silbermann between 1732 and 1736. Silbermann was so pleased with the sound of this new invention that he included it in most of his later organs.[4]

References[edit]


^ Marcuse, Sibyl (1964). "Chalumeau". Musical Instruments, A Comprehensive Dictionary. New York: Doubleday add Company. p. 87.

^ a b Birsak, K. (1994). The Clarinet: A Cultural History. Buchloe: Druck und Verlag Obermayer GmbH.

^ a b c d e f g h i Hoeprich, E. (2008). The Clarinet. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Rice, A.R. (1992). the Baroque Clarinet. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

^ Kroll, O. (1968). The Clarinet. New York, NY: Taplinger Publishing Company.

^ "Tupian Chalumeaus". Tupian Chalumeaus. Retrieved 24 May 2017.

^ Dart, Thurston (July 1953). "The Mock Trumpet". The Galpin Society Journal. 6. Galpin Society: 35–40. doi:10.2307/841715. JSTOR 841715.


External links[edit]
List of works featuring the Chalumeau at IMSLP
 Media related to Chalumeaux at Wikimedia Commons
Delicacy, sentimentality and intimacy: the chalumeau as 'signifier' - Ingrid Elizabeth Pearson


vteClarinetClarinet family
A♭ clarinet
E♭ clarinet
Soprano (B♭) clarinet
Alto clarinet
Bass clarinet
Contra-alto clarinet
Contrabass clarinets
Saxonette
Quarter tone clarinet
Basset clarinet
Clarinette d'amour
Basset horn
Fingering systems
Albert
Boehm
Reform Boehm
Mazzeo
Müller
Oehler
Clarinet makers
Amati-Denak
Backun Musical Services
E. K. Blessing
Buffet Crampon
Johann Christoph Denner
Benedikt Eppelsheim
Stephen Fox
Heinrich Grenser
Leitner & Kraus
Howarth of London
Jupiter Band Instruments
Leblanc
Iwan Müller
Adolphe Sax
Schwenk & Seggelke
Selmer
Herbert Wurlitzer
Yamaha Corporation
Related
Clarinet choir
Clarinet concerto
Clarinet sonata
Clarinet quintet
Clarinet quartet
Clarinet trio
Clarinet-violin-piano
Clarinet-viola-piano
Clarinet-cello-piano
Clarinetists
Benny Goodman
Category:Clarinetists by nationality
Mezz Mezzrow

vteSingle reed instrumentsModern
Clarinet
Heckel-clarina
Heckelphone-clarinet
Octavin
Saxophone
Tárogató
Venova
Xaphoon
European
Alboka
Birbynė
Chalumeau
Diplica
Ganurags
Hornpipe
Launeddas
Mock trumpet
Pibgorn
Pilili
Pku
Reclam de xeremies
Sipsi
Stock-and-horn
Zhaleika
Middle Eastern
Arghul
Double clarinet
Dozaleh
Mijwiz
Sipsi
Central Asian
Bülban
Dili tuiduk
South Asian
Pepa
Pungi
Southeast Asian
Pey pok
Sarune Etek
Toleat

Authority control databases NationalGermanyOtherMusicBrainz instrument




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chalumeau&oldid=1278181346"
Categories: Single-reed instrumentsEarly musical instrumentsHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataPages with French IPAAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from June 2018Commons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 22:59 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Chalumeau




























20 languages


Add topic
















