



Gittern - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Structure








2
Relationship between gittern, the citole, lute and guitar family








3
Etymology and identity








4
Role in literature




Toggle Role in literature subsection





4.1
Cantigas of Santa Maria








4.2
Guillaume de Machaut








4.3
Geoffrey Chaucer








4.4
Other written records










5
Resources








6
References








7
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Gittern



13 languages




العربيةCatalàČeštinaEestiEspañolFrançaisGaeilgeItalianoMagyarOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаPolskiРусскийУкраїнська

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Medieval necked bowl lute
Not to be confused with cittern, zither, or guitar.
GitternFive course Gittern or "Quintern" dated 1450, built by luthier Hans OthClassification
String instrument (plucked)Hornbostel–Sachs classification321.322 (necked box lute)(Chordophone)Developed13th centuryRelated instruments

List

Lute
Mandolin
Mandola
Mandora
Mandore
Oud
Guitar
Setar
Sitar
Theorbo


The gittern was a relatively small gut-strung, round-backed instrument that first appeared in literature and pictorial representation during the 13th century in Western Europe (Iberian Peninsula, Italy, France, England). It is usually depicted played with a quill plectrum,[1] as can be seen clearly beginning in manuscript illuminations from the thirteenth century. It was also called the guiterna in Spain, guiterne or guiterre in France, the chitarra in Italy and Quintern in Germany.[2] A popular instrument with court musicians, minstrels, and amateurs, the gittern is considered an ancestor of the modern guitar and other instruments like the mandore, bandurria and gallichon.[3][4]
From the early 16th century, a vihuela-shaped (flat-backed) guitarra began to appear in Spain, and later in France, existing alongside the gittern. Although the round-backed instrument appears to have lost ground to the new form which gradually developed into the guitar familiar today, the influence of the earlier style continued. Examples of lutes converted into guitars exist in several museums, while purpose-built instruments like the gallichon utilised the tuning and single string configuration of the modern guitar. A tradition of building round-backed guitars in Germany continued to the 20th century with names like Gittar-Laute and Wandervogellaute.
Up until 2002, there were only two known surviving medieval gitterns,[5][6] one in the Metropolitan Museum of Art (see external links), the other in the Wartburg Castle Museum. A third was discovered in a medieval outhouse in Elbląg, Poland.[6][7]


Structure[edit]
Gittern (right) depicted in a c. 1322 fresco scene from the life of St. Martin of Tours. The instrument on the left is a set of aulos.Juan Oliver's c.1330 painting at Pamplona Cathedral, showing a musician playing a gittern.
The back, neck and pegbox were probably usually carved from one piece of timber. Occurring less rarely later in the 15th century, the back was built up from a number of thin tapered ribs joined at the edges, as was characteristic of the lute. Unlike the sharp corner joining the body to the neck seen in the lute, the gittern's body and neck either joined in a smooth curve or straight line. The sickle, or occasional gentle arc pegbox, made an angle with the neck of between 30 and 90 degrees. Unlike the lute, most pegboxes on gitterns ended in a carving of a human or animal head.
Most gitterns were depicted as having three or (more commonly) four courses of double strings. There are also references to some five course gitterns in the 16th century. Although there is not much direct information concerning gittern tuning, the later versions were quite possibly tuned in fourths and fifths like the mandore a few decades later. Frets were represented in a few depictions (mainly Italian and German), although apparently absent in most French, Spanish and English depictions. The gittern's sound hole was covered with a rosette (a delicate wood carving or parchment cutting), similar to the lute.
The construction resembles other bowed and plucked instruments, including the rebec, Calabrian and Byzantine lyra, gǎdulka, lijerica, klasic kemençe, gudok and cobza. These have similar shapes, a short neck, and like the gittern are carved out of a single block of wood.

Relationship between gittern, the citole, lute and guitar family[edit]
See also: Lute § History and evolution of the lute, and Citole § Origins
By 1575, the German quintern included guitar-shaped instruments.Section from Sebastian Virdung's 1511 book, Musica getuscht und angezogen. (Top left) lute, (right) viol, (bottom) gittern
Some have pointed out that there have been errors in scholarship (starting in the 19th century) which led to the gittern being called mandore and vice versa,[8] and similar confusion with the citole.[8] As a result of this uncertainty, many modern sources refer to gitterns as mandoras, and to citoles as gitterns.
A number of modern sources have also claimed the instrument was introduced to Europe from the Arabic regions in a manner similar to the lute, but actual historical data supporting this theory is rare, ambiguous, and may suggest the opposite. The various regional names used (including the Arabic) appear derived over time from a Greco-Roman (Vulgar Latin) origin, although when and how this occurred is presently unknown.[citation needed] It is possible the instrument existed in Europe during a period earlier than the Arabic conquests in the Iberian peninsula, with the names diverging alongside the regional evolution of European languages from Latin following the collapse of the Roman Empire (compare Romance languages).
While the name of the lute (Portuguese alaúde, Spanish laud, from Arabic al-ʿūd), and the instrument itself has been interpreted as being of Arabic/Persian origin, the gittern does not appear in historical Arabic source material to support what can only be speculation.[citation needed]

Etymology and identity[edit]
One of the three "gitterns" may not beInstrument in the Metropolitan Museum of Arts labeled a gittern in James Tyler's book, The Early Mandolin. The museum catalog, Medieval Art from Private Collections: A Special Exhibition at the Cloisters said that it probably wasn't a gittern but a bowed instrument, possibly a rebec, but one with five strings instead of the rebec's normal three.[9]
See also: Iberian Romance languages
The gittern had faded so completely from memory in England that identifying the instrument proved problematic for 20th-century early music scholarship. It was assumed the ancestry of the modern guitar was only to be discovered through the study of flat-backed instruments. As a consequence, what is now believed to be the only known surviving medieval citole was until recently labelled a gittern.
In 1977, Lawrence Wright published his article The Medieval Gittern and Citole: A Case of Mistaken Identity. in issue 30 of the Galpin Society Journal; with detailed references to primary historical source material revealing the gittern as a round-backed instrument - and the so-called 'Warwick Castle gittern' (a flat-backed instrument) as originally a citole.
Wright's research also corresponded with observations about the origins of the flat-backed guitarra made by 16th-century Spanish musicologist Juan Bermudo. With this theoretical approach, it became possible for scholars to untangle previously confusing and contradictory nomenclature. Because of the complex nature of the subject, the list and links below should assist in further reading.

Names in English: gittern, gittron, giterninge, giterne. John Playford's A Booke of New Lessons for the Cithern & Gittern (published in London in 1652) may represent a response to the continued popularity of both instruments; although references to the gittern virtually disappear in England during the following century. The guitar that re-surfaces during the mid-1750s (referred to as English guitar or 'guittar'), enjoying a wave of popularity that faded away in the 19th century; is an entirely different instrument related to later developments of the cittern. During the 14th century in Geoffrey Chaucer's time, the 'e' that appears at the end of his English spelling 'gyterne' would have been pronounced. But following the great vowel shift - Playford's gittern has lost the 'e' altogether. Although Wright's work enabled identification of the medieval instrument, references to it in 16th century England are more ambivalent regarding structure - leading to the initial confusion identifying the citole.  It seems reasonable French and Spanish fashions influenced the gittern during the time of Henry VIII as they did elsewhere.
Artwork from the Bayeux Cathedral in France,  showing an angel playing a gittern.
Names in French: gviterre (the 'v' is a Latin substitute for 'u'), guisterne, guitarre, guiterne, guyterne, guiterre, quinterne, quitaire, quitarre (the 'e' at the end of the word may have been stressed in a different and heavier manner to modern pronouncement in a similar manner to the English). In France, the plucked form of the flat-backed 'vielle' (cognate with Spanish 'vihuela'), never assumed the importance it developed in the Iberian and Italian peninsulas. As a consequence the replacement of the round-backed guitarre by the new Spanish style appears disconnected with little to trace in historic sources. The 16th century saw the publications (with illustrations on the front cover depicting the instrument) of works by composers like Guillaume Morlaye and Adrian Le Roy intended for the four course flat-backed guitar, reflecting a new popularity in France possibly more so than Spain.
Names in Italian: chitarino (It. diminutive, i.e. small chitara), chitarrino, chitarra, cythara. James Tyler has considered the possibility of the chitarino being ancestral to the early mandolin during the 15th century. The chitarrone (literally large 'chitarra'), is an instrument that appeared in the late 1580s and became important for its role in basso continuo supporting various musical ensembles during the 17th century as well as for solo works. The alternative name 'tiorba' (English theorbo) displaced the original word, and is now the preferred term used by modern musicians.
Names in German: quintern, chiterna, quinterna - possibly derived from the later development of a five course instrument (overlay of Latin quinctus 'five' with chiterna or similar). Juan Bermudo mentioned having seen a 5 course guitarra but that 4 course instruments were normal. The quinterna that appears in the German Michael Praetorius treatise on musical instruments of 1618, Syntagma Musicum (Plate 16) - has pegs inserted sideways in the pegbox but the body is now a flat figure-of-8 shape. Like Bermudo, Praetorius also mentions 5 course instruments but considers 4 courses normal. The surviving instrument by Hans Oth is unusual in comparison to historical depictions, the strings pass over the bridge and are fastened to the lower edge of the body. The strings in historical illustrations are normally shown fastened to the bridge, which may suggest the instrument was converted from four courses at a later date to its construction and the original bridge detached.
Name in Spanish: guiterna
Names in Arabic: kouitra, quitra, kaitara. This four course round-backed instrument is usually mentioned in connection with theories supporting an Arabic origin for the gittern. It is constructed in a similar manner to the chitarra Italiana and the oud, although the pegbox has lost all trace of its 'sickle-shaped' predecessor.  The modern instrument appears to have survived and developed in Algeria in isolation from surrounding regions, and is traditionally associated with the music of Al-Andalus. This cultural tradition in North Africa is considered closely linked to development in the Iberian peninsula and the later expulsion of the Moriscos between 1609 and 1614.
Name in Portuguese: The process whereby the round-backed guitarra became a flat-backed instrument in Spain (and the instrument itself) appears to have left little impact on Portuguese history. The usage of 'guitarra' in the 18th century (to present) Portugal refers to a different instrument - the guitarra portuguesa, related to later developments of the cittern.
The modern Portuguese equivalent to the 'Spanish guitar' is still generally known as viola (violão in Brazil - literally large viola), as are some smaller regional related instruments. Portuguese 'viola' (like Italian), is cognate with Spanish 'vihuela'. Unlike in Spain, all these instruments traditionally used metal strings until the advent of modern nylon strings. While the modern violão is now commonly strung with nylon (although steel string variations still exist), in Portugal musicians differentiate between the nylon strung version as guitarra clássica and the traditional instrument as viola de Fado, reflecting the historical relationship with fado music.
While the English and Germans are considered to have borrowed their names from the French,[10] Spanish "guitarra", Italian "chitarra", and the French "guitarre" are believed ultimately to be derived from the Greek "kithara"[10] - although the origins of the historical process which brought this about are not yet understood, with very little actual evidence other than linguistic to explore.

Role in literature[edit]
Cantigas of Santa Maria[edit]
Picture from the Cantigas of Santa Maria showing two musicians with gitternsGittern played by an angel, Cathedral Saint Julien du Mans, France, c. 1325
In Spanish literature, the 13th-century Cantigas de Santa Maria with its detailed colored miniature illustrations depicting musicians playing a wide variety of instruments is often used for modern interpretations - the pictures reproduced and captioned, accompanied by claims supporting various theories and commenting on the instruments.
None of the surviving four manuscripts contain captions (or text in the poems) to support observations other than the gittern appears to have had equal status with other instruments. Although social attitudes towards instruments like the lute, rebec, and gittern may have changed in Spain much later with the cultural impact of the Reconquista - what is recorded in the Cantigas indicates the opposite during this period of history.
Far from being considered an example of Islamic culture, the instrument was used for one occasion to illustrate principles of Christian religious doctrine. French theologian Jean Gerson compared the four cardinal virtues to "la guiterne de quatre cordes" (the gittern of four strings). Italian statesman and poet Dante Alighieri, referring to the qualities (and possibly the structure) of the gittern, said, "...just as it would be a blameworthy operation to make a spade of a fine sword or a goblet of a fine chitarra."

Guillaume de Machaut[edit]
However, 14th-century French composer Guillaume de Machaut in his poem Prise d'Alexandrie: 1150 "Lutes, moraches and guiterne / were played in taverns", notes a secular role away from religious references or royal and ducal courts.

Geoffrey Chaucer[edit]
A reconstruction of a medieval gittern
Chaucer also mentions the gittern in the Canterbury Tales (late 14th century) being played by people who frequent taverns. In The Miller's Tale, Absalom serenades a woman outside her window:[11]


    Now was ther of that chirche a parish clerk, 
    the which that was ycleped (called) Absalon...
    and as wel coud he play on a giterne. 
    In all the town n'as (there never was) brewhous ne (nor) taverne, 
    that he ne visited with his solas [solos].[12]


And his The Cooks Tale.,[11] Al konne he pleye on gyterne or ribible (all can he play on gittern or rebab).[13]

Other written records[edit]
Praetorius, commenting on a dual-purpose social role, "..in Italy, the Ziarlatini and Salt' in banco use them for simple strummed accompaniments to their villanelle and other vulgar, clownish songs. (These people are something like our comedians and buffoons.)
However, to use the (chiterna) for the beautiful art-song of a good professional singer is a different thing altogether."
The gittern often appeared during the 14th to early 15th century in the inventories of several courts. Charles V of France's court recorded four, including one of ivory, while the Italian courts of Este and Ferrara recorded the hiring of gittern (chitarra) masters.

Resources[edit]
Early Music Muse - Gittern
Early Music Instrument Database - Gittern

References[edit]


^ P. 118. The Encyclopedia of Music. New York: Hermes House, 2002.

^ The Grove Dictionary of Musical Instruments (2nd Edition) (April 2014). Quinterne [quintern]. ISBN 978-0-19-974339-1. Retrieved 2015-03-20.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)

^ Tyler, James (January 1981). "The Mandore in the 16th and 17th Centuries" (PDF). Early Music. 9 (1): 22–31. doi:10.1093/earlyj/9.1.22. Retrieved 10 April 2019. ...the small, lute-like instrument of the Middle Ages called, until recently, the 'mandora' by modern writers, was originally called the 'gittern'...generally used for the small, four-course, renaissance guitar, but it was still also occasionally used (until well into the 17th century) for the instrument which, during the 16th century, became known as the 'mandore'. ... it is to the Spaniard Juan Bermudo that we must turn... in his Declaration de instrumentos (1555), Bermudo speaks of the bandurria...

^ Meucci, Renato (2001). "Da 'chitarra italiana' a 'chitarrone': una nuova interpretazione". Enrico Radesca da Foggia e il suo tempo: Atti del Convegno di studi, Foggia, 7–8 Aprile 2000. pp. 30–57. ISBN 978-887096347-2.

^ Tyler, James; Sparks, Paul (1992). The Early Mandolin. Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. 1–7. ISBN 0-19-816302-9.

^ a b Martin Kirnbauer; Musikwissenschaftl. Institut; Uni Basel. "Mittelalterliche Musikzeugnisse". Archived from the original on 2004-12-25. Retrieved 2010-12-06.

^ "Unprofitable Instruments". Retrieved 2010-12-06.

^ a b The Groves Dictionary of Musical Instruments (2nd Edition) (April 2014). Mandore [Mandorre]. ISBN 978-0-19-974339-1. Retrieved 2015-03-21.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)

^ Medieval Art from Private Collections: A Special Exhibition at the Cloisters, October 30, 1968, Through March 30, 1969 : Introduction and Catalogue. 1968. p. 216.

^ a b The Groves Dictionary of Musical Instruments (2nd Edition) (April 2014). Gittern [gyterne]. ISBN 978-0-19-974339-1. Retrieved 2015-03-21.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)

^ a b Music in the age of Chaucer By Nigel Wilkins. Page 114. Published by DS Brewer, 1999

^ The Canterbury tales By Geoffrey Chaucer, Thomas Tyrwhit. Page 93-94. Published by D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1870.

^ Robert Boenig and Andrewy Tayler, editors, The Canterbury Tales, Second Edition, Broadview Press, Broadview Editions 2nd Edition, page 118, line 4396, ISBN 9781554811069.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gittern.

Guide to Early Instruments - The Gittern and Citole discussed. Author writes strongly as to why there is historical confusion over instrument names.
The Guitar in England Archived 2018-05-22 at the Wayback Machine
Modern Gittern reproduction played on YouTube
vteMandolinGeneral topics
History
North America
Players
Playing traditions
Society (Peterborough)
Family instruments
Bandola
Bandolin
Bandora
Bandurria
Cittern
Gittern
Irish bouzouki
Laouto
Mandobass
Mandocello
Mandola
Mandolin-banjo
Mandolone
Mandolute
Mandore
Mandriola
Octave mandolin
Orpharion
Resonator mandolin
Manufacturers
Beltona
Breedlove
Collings
Dean
Del Vecchio
Epiphone
Giannini
Gibson
Harmony
Hohner
Hora
Ibanez
Levin
Martin
Michael Kelly
National
National Reso-Phonic
Oscar Schmidt
Ovation
Regal
Seagull
Stagg
Tacoma
Tanglewood
Weymann

 Category
 Commons

vteLuteTypes by regionAfrica
Goje
Xalam
Asia
Barbat
Bipa
Biwa
Dombra
Dutar
Dramyin
Komuz
Kutiyapi
Oud
Pipa
Qanbūs
Qinqin
Rubab
Sanshin
Sanxian
Sapeh
Setar
Shamisen
Sitar
Tanbur
Tar
Veena
Yueqin
Europe
Angélique
Archlute
Cobza
Kobza
Mandore
Mandora
Swedish lute
Torban
Theorbo
Vihuela
Related instruments
Citole
Cittern
English guitar
Gittern
Guitarra latina
Guitarra morisca
Laúd
Other topics
Composers
Manufacturers
Players
 Commons
vteMedieval music
List of composers
List of music theorists
List of musical instruments
Early (before 1150)
Abbey of Saint Gall
Notker the Stammerer
Tuotilo
Stephen of Liège
Hucbald*
Odo of Cluny*
Fulbert of Chartres
Heriger of Lobbes
Saint Martial school
Adémar de Chabannes
Odo of Arezzo*
Notker Physicus
St. Godric
Peter Abelard
Hildegard of Bingen
Adam of Saint Victor
Wulfstan the Cantor?
Wipo of Burgundy?
High (1150–1300)Ars antiqua
Notre-Dame school
Albertus Parisiensis
Léonin
Pérotin
Philippe le Chancelier
Petrus de Cruce*

Troubadour& Trobairitz*
Aimeric de Peguilhan
Arnaut Daniel
Arnaut de Mareuil
Bernart de Ventadorn
Bertran de Born
Castelloza
Cerverí de Girona
Comtessa de Dia*
Folquet de Marselha
Gaucelm Faidit
Giraut de Bornelh
Guiraut Riquier
Jaufre Rudel
Marcabru
Peire d'Alvernha
Peire Cardenal
Peire Vidal
Peirol
Perdigon
Raimbaut d'Aurenga
Raimbaut de Vaqueiras
Raimon de Miravalh
Sordello
William IX, Duke of Aquitaine
Other troubadours and trobairitz...

Trouvère
Adam de la Halle
Andrieu Contredit d'Arras
Audefroi le Bastart
Blondel de Nesle
Le Chastelain de Couci
Chrétien de Troyes
Colin Muset
Conon de Béthune
Gace Brulé
Gautier de Coincy
Gautier de Dargies
Gautier d'Espinal
Gillebert de Berneville
Gontier de Soignies
Guillaume le Vinier
Guiot de Dijon
Jehan Bretel
Jehan Erart
Jehan le Cuvelier d'Arras
Moniot d'Arras
Perrin d'Angicourt
Philippe de Rémi
Raoul de Soissons
Other trouvères...

Casella
Goliards
Minnesang
Galician-Portuguese lyric
List of Galician-Portuguese troubadoursLate (1300–1400)Ars nova
F. Andrieu
Denis Le Grant
Magister Franciscus
Grimace
Jehan de Lescurel
Guillaume de Machaut
P. des Molins
Jehan Vaillant
Philippe de Vitry*

TrecentoPredecessors
Marchetto da Padova

1st generation
Giovanni da Cascia
Jacopo da Bologna
Maestro Piero
Vincenzo da Rimini

2nd generation
Andreas de Florentia
Donato da Cascia
Francesco Landini
Gherardello da Firenze
Lorenzo da Firenze*
Paolo da Firenze

3rd generation
Bartolino da Padova
Antonello da Caserta
Johannes Ciconia*
Matteo da Perugia
Giovanni Mazzuoli
Grazioso da Padova
Niccolò da Perugia
Philippus de Caserta
Sant Omer
Zacara da Teramo

Ars subtilior
Borlet
Philippus de Caserta
Johannes Ciconia*
Conradus de Pistoria
Baude Cordier
Johannes Cuvelier
Egardus
Egidius
Martinus Fabri
Petrus de Goscalch
Johannes Symonis Hasprois
Matheus de Sancto Johanne
Gacian Reyneau
Rodericus
Jacob Senleches
Solage
Johannes Susay
Antonio Zacara da Teramo
Trebor

Others
Johannes Alanus
John Dunstaple
Contenance angloise
Thomas Fabri
Roy Henry
Arnold de Lantins
Leonel Power
W. de Wycombe
Theorists
Anonymous IV
Guido of Arezzo
Franco of Cologne
Johannes Cotto
Johannes de Garlandia
Johannes de Grocheio
Iacobus de Ispania
Notker Labeo
Johannes de Muris
Walter Odington
Berno of Reichenau
Aurelian of Réôme
Musical forms
Antiphon
Canso
Carol
Chanson
Chansonnier
Chant
Conductus
Estampie
Formes fixes
Ballade
Rondeau
Virelai
Geisslerlied
Gregorian chant
Pope Gregory I
Lai
Tydorel
Liturgical drama
Madrigal
Motet
Organum
Planctus
Traditions
British Isles
England
Scotland
Cyprus
France
Germany
Italy
Lithuania
Portugal
Spain
Derivations
Bardcore
Medieval folk rock
Medieval metal
Neo-Medieval music
Background
Early music
Middle Ages
Art
Architecture
Poetry
Literature
Philosophy

Also music theorist*
Renaissance music →
 Category
 Portal

vteClassical guitar
Guitar
Luthier
Main articles
History
Early recordings
Technique
Repertoire
Strings
Making
Pedagogy
Additional strings
7-string
armónico
Russian
8-string
Brahms
9-string
10-string
Yepes'
11-string
12-string
13-string
14-string
25-string
Related instruments
Flamenco guitar
Harp guitar
Lyre-guitar
Modern classical guitar
Requinto
6-string alto
Early guitars
Baroque guitar
Citole
Cittern
English guitar
Gittern
Guitarra latina
Guitarra morisca
Laúd
Romantic guitar
Vihuela
Lists
Classical guitarists
Composers for the classical guitar
by nationality
Compositions for guitar
International competitions
Bibliography

Authority control databases NationalGermanyOtherMusicBrainz instrument




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gittern&oldid=1251244186"
Categories: Early musical instrumentsMandolin family instrumentsGuitar family instrumentsNecked bowl lutesMedieval musical instrumentsHidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles containing Spanish-language textArticles containing French-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles containing German-language textPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2016Commons category link is on WikidataWebarchive template wayback links






 This page was last edited on 15 October 2024, at 03:59 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Gittern




























13 languages


Add topic
















