



Mandore (instrument) - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Construction








3
Methods of playing








4
Tuning




Toggle Tuning subsection





4.1
According to Praetorius






4.1.1
Fifths and fourths








4.1.2
Fourths and fifths










4.2
According to Mersenne






4.2.1
Tuning in Unison








4.2.2
Tuning with a lowered string








4.2.3
Tuning in a third










4.3
According to the Skene Manuscript










5
Relationship to other instruments




Toggle Relationship to other instruments subsection





5.1
Comparison with lute








5.2
Comparison with treble lute








5.3
Comparison with mandola and mandolino








5.4
Comparison with Neapolitan mandolin








5.5
Comparison with bandola








5.6
Comparison with Scottish mandora










6
Name controversy








7
Composers








8
Bibliography








9
References








10
External links




Toggle External links subsection





10.1
Research papers and books








10.2
Web pages








10.3
Museum Examples




















Toggle the table of contents







Mandore (instrument)



8 languages




CatalàDeutschFrançais日本語OccitanPolskiPortuguêsРусский

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Musical instrument
This article is about a treble lute. For a bass lute, see mandora.
MandoreMandora c. 1700–1799 exhibited at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, NYString instrumentClassification
String instrument
Plucked string instrument
Related instruments

List

Bandola
Bandurria
bouzouki
Gittern
Lute
Mandolin
Mandola
Octave mandola
Oud


Lombardy mandolinLombardic mandolin with 12 strings in 6 courses. The bridge is glued to the soundboard, like a guitar's bridgeGiovanni Vailati, "Blind mandolinist of Cremona," toured Europe in the 1850s with a six-string Lombardy mandolin.[1]
The mandore is a musical instrument, a small member of the lute family, teardrop shaped, with four to six courses of gut strings[2] and pitched in the treble range.[3] Considered a French instrument, with much of the surviving music coming from France, it was used across "Northern Europe" including Germany and Scotland. Although it went out of style, the French instrument has been revived for use in classical music. The instrument's most commonly played relatives today are members of the mandolin family and the bandurria.
The mandore arrived in France from Spain, and was considered a new instrument in French music books from the 1580s,[4] but can be seen as a development of the gittern.[5][6] In Spain the mandore was called vandola.[6][4]  Musicologist James Tyler said that the Spanish bandurria with three strings was the mandore, although it had four strings when it arrived in France.[7] In its Spanish form the bandurria may have resembled the rebec.[7]
The mandore was played widely across Europe, just as the earlier gittern had been. The Italians called it the mandola and even as the instrument became obsolete elsewhere, by the mid 17th century they had developed it into "an instrument with its own distinct tuning, technique and music."[7] In Milan, Italy as the mandore or Lombardo, it remained in use into the late 19th century. That variant is known today as the Milanese or Lombardic mandolin, and retains the mandore's tuning. The Italians also called it the mandora or mandola. The latter name is still used in the mandolin family for an alto or tenor range instrument. From the mandola, the baroque mandolino was created, which in turn became the modern mandolin.[8][6][9]
The Germans continued to use quinterne, their name for the gittern. Michael Praetorius recorded the names mandürichen, bandürichen, mandoër, mandurinichen, mandörgen, and pandurina. The latter name, pandurina, was also applied in the 1700s in Italy to the Milanese mandolin.[10][11][12][3][8]


History[edit]
See also: Lute § History and evolution of the lute, Mandolin, and History of the mandolin
A "Mandörgen" from the 1619 book Syntagma Musicum II by Michael Praetorius. See Praetorius' Plate 16. The instrument appears to have four courses of strings; three single strings and a set of double strings on the rightAn example of a mandore made by Boissart, in the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum.[13] The back and neck are one piece, carved from a block of pearwood, and features images of Juno, Minerva and Venus in a beauty contest, the Judgement of Paris. The gargoyle-like head at the bottom is Medusa
Illustrations in the 13th-century Cantigas de Santa Maria show instruments similar to lutes, mandores, mandolas and guitars, being played by European and Islamic players. The instruments moved from Spain northward to France[13][14] and eastward towards Italy by way of Provence.
Beside the introduction of the lute to Spain (Andalusia) by the Moors, another important point of transfer of the lute from Arabian to European culture was Sicily, where it was brought either by Byzantine or later by Muslim musicians.[15] There were singer-lutenists at the court in Palermo following the Norman conquest of the island from the Muslims, and the lute is depicted extensively in the ceiling paintings in the royal Cappella Palatina in Palermo, dedicated by the Norman King Roger II of Sicily in 1140.[15] His Hohenstaufen grandson Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor (1194 - 1250) continued integrating Muslims into his court, including Moorish musicians.[16] By the fourteenth century, lutes had disseminated throughout Italy and, probably because of the cultural influence of the Hohenstaufen kings and emperor, the lute made significant inroads into German-speaking lands.

Construction[edit]
Like the earlier gittern, the mandore's back and neck were in earlier forms carved out of a block of wood.[17] This "hollowed out construction" did still exist in the 16th century, according to James Tyler, but was becoming rare.[17] The method was being replaced by gluing curved staves together to form back, and adding a neck and peg box.[17]
From Mersenne: The normal length of a mandore is 11⁄2 feet long. It is built as a lute, with "strips of fir or other wood" ... "cut and bent into melon shape" to make a rounded back.[18] The fingerboard is on the same plane as the soundboard, with a bridge glued onto the soundboard. Strings are secured in the pegboard in the neck, pass over the fingerboard and soundboard and are tied to a flat bridge, which is glued to the soundboard.[19] The instrument may have as few as four strings or as many as six. It could also have four to six courses of two strings.[19] The soundhole was covered with a rose, either carved directly into the soundboard or glued in.[20]

Methods of playing[edit]
From Marin Mersenne, 1635: A musician plays the mandore "with the finger or the tip of a feather between thumb and index finger or tied to one of the other fingers."[18] "Those who make perfect use of the mandore would move the pick so fast over the strings that they seem to form even chords as they would be if played at the same time."[21]
Another early 17th-century author, Michael Praetorius, agreed. He said, "They play either with a cittern-type quill plectrum, or with one finger - and this with the speed, clarity, and precision that we would expect from the use of three or four fingers. There are some players, however, who start to use two or more fingers once they are familiar with the instrument."[22]

Tuning[edit]
According to Praetorius[edit]
A modern built mandore. This one has five courses of strings; 4 single strings and one set of double strings
Michael Praetorius detailed four tunings for the Mandore in his book Syntagma Musicum in 1619. He listed three tunings (with one repeated) for tuning the mandore. His tuning illustrates tuning for both 4-stringed instruments and 5-stringed instruments.[5]

Fifths and fourths[edit]
The listed tunings using fifths and fourths between strings are:[5]

C-G-C-G
C-G-C-G-C
G-D-G-D
Fourths and fifths[edit]
The listed tuning for fourths and fifths tuning is:[5]

C-F-C-F-C
According to Mersenne[edit]
Mersenne indicates in his book that there were many ways to tune a mandore, but three ways predominated: tuning in unison, tuning with a lowered string, and tuning in a third.

Tuning in Unison[edit]
For a four-string mandore, Mersenne said, "The fourth string is a fifth of the third; the third string is at the fourth of the second, and the second at a fifth from the treble string."[18] In other words, the mandore used a combination of fourths and fifths the courses of strings, such as c-g-c-g.[23]

Tuning with a lowered string[edit]
Mersenne indicated that this was less common than tuning in unison. To tune this way, "the treble string is lowered a tone, so to make a fourth with the third string."[24] In other words, going from tuning c-g-c-g to c-g-c-f.

Tuning in a third[edit]
In tuning a third, one "lowers the treble string down a minor third, so it makes a major third with the third."[24] An example is going from c-g-c-g to c-g-c-e.

According to the Skene Manuscript[edit]
The tunes in the Skene Manuscript are for a mandore tuned in fourths and fifths. Dauney points out in his editing of the Skene Manuscript that the tablature is written strangely, that although it is tabbed for a four-string instrument, it is marked under the bottom line, indicating a five-string instrument:[25]

A-D-A-D-A
and also an older lute tuning in fourths (except between F and A, which is a third):[25]

C-F-A-D-G
Relationship to other instruments[edit]
Comparison with lute[edit]
Mandola, mandolino, mandolinFltr: 1. Genoese mandola,  c. 1750. Mandolino means small mandola; this was the larger (wider) instrument.; 2. Cutler-Challen Choral Mandolino made in Cremona, Italy by Antonio Stradivari, c. 1680, kept at the National Music Museum, Vermillion, South Dakota, made one hundred years after the mandore was being labeled "new" in France; 3. Metal-string mandolin made between 1767 and 1784 by Vicenzo Vinaccia, displayed at the Museu de la Música de Barcelona.
Marin Mersenne ends his section on the mandore in his book Harmonie Universelle by saying, "It is nothing but an abbreviated lute."[21] He said this in the context that one could look at his section on the lute for applicable information. Lutes were larger than mandores, which Mersenne described as miniature. Lutes had more courses of strings and were not restricted to the high treble range, but could play into the bass range.
Earlier in the section, he compared the lute to the mandore. "Now although the mandore has only four strings, nevertheless one plays it rather above all that is played in a lute, whose chorus it covers because of the liveliness and sharpness of its tone, which penetrates and so preoccupies the ear that the lutes have trouble being heard."[26] He said that good mandore players were prone to speedy picking, blurring notes together in a rush of speed.[21]

Comparison with treble lute[edit]
Mandores and treble lutes were tuned differently: treble lutes from the 16th and early 17th centuries had six or more courses of strings, tuned to a "4th, a 4th, a major third, a 4th, a fourth."[27]
Though a member of the lute family, it has been said that the mandore was not a treble lute, which had six or more courses and was tuned the same way as mainstream lutes[28]

Comparison with mandola and mandolino[edit]
To a layman, images of the mandola and mandore show no obvious differences, when comparing two instruments from the same time period. One visible difference was that the mandola and mandolino commonly used double courses of strings, where illustrations of the mandore commonly show single strings.[2] A less visible difference was in the tuning: the Italian mandola and smaller mandolino were tuned entirely in fourths, the mandola using e'-a'-d"-g" (or if using a 5 or 6 course instrument g-b-e'-a'-d"-g"); the French mandore used combinations of fourths and fifths, such as c-g-c-g or c-f-c-f.[2][28] As the instruments developed, they became physically less similar. By the 17th century, makers such as Antonio Stradivarius had two styles of instrument patterns, with the mandola having strings almost twice as long as the mandolino's.[29]
Two styles of mandolas have made it into museums, flat-backed and bowl-backed. Flat-backed mandolas resemble citterns. Bowl-backed mandolas resemble mandores. One example that has survived of a bowl-backed mandola is that made by Vicenti di Verona in 1696, held by the Hungarian National Museum, Budapest, Hungary. By looks alone, telling the bowl-backed mandola from the mandore can be a challenge.

Comparison with Neapolitan mandolin[edit]
A mandora with the paper or carved wood rose over the sound hole
Pictures and illustrations of the mandore show an instrument that at a casual look, appears very similar to lutes and the later mandolins. The mandore differs from the Neapolitan mandolin in not having a raised fretboard and in having a flat soundboard.[2] Also, It was strung with gut strings, attached to a bridge that is glued to the soundboard[30] (similar to that of a modern guitar). It was played with the fingertips.
In contrast, the Neapolitan mandolin's soundboard is bent.[31] It uses metal strings attached to the end of the instrument, crossing over a bridge that pushes downwards into the bent soundboard.[31]
The differences in design reflect progress in a technological push for louder instruments.[32] If the mandore's gut-strings were tightened too much they broke, but metal strings could pull the fixed bridge off the soundboard, or damage the soundboard. The bend in the Neapolitan's soundboard (new technology at the time) let the soundboard take the pressure of metal strings, driving the bridge down into the soundboard.[32] The result was a louder instrument with less fragile strings. The metal strings are played with a plectrum, creating even more volume.[33] Mandolins are tuned in fifths, typically g-d-a-e for a four-string mandolin.

Comparison with bandola[edit]
Another group of related instruments to the mandore are the vandola or bandola, the bandurria and the bandolim, of Spanish origin, also played in Portugal and South America.
In 1761, Joan Carles Amat said of the vandola, in his Guitarra espanola, y vandola, "the vandola with six courses is described here, because it is the more perfect form of the instrument, and better known and more widely used at this time than that with four or five courses".

Comparison with Scottish mandora[edit]
A principal source of music for the Scottish variant of the instrument can be found in The Ancient Melodies of Scotland by William Dauney. This book is a history of Scottish music, and contains some information on the mandora. Dauney makes it clear that the mandora (which he also calls the mandour) for which the tunes in the Skene Manuscript are written, is the same instrument that Mersenne called the mandore.[25]
Like the mandora described above, it is in "lute" form, but it is a tenor instrument of five paired courses. The string length is variable, like all of the lute family, but generally in the range of 32 to 36 cm. Tuning patterns are unique, the intervals between courses being alternating fourths and fifths, for example d-g-d'-g'-d", as Pretorius Syntagma Musicum mandore's tuning (1619). There is a book of tunes in French tablature from about 1620 called The Skene Mandora Book, available on microfilm as a loan to members of the Lute Society of America, or as part of The Ancient Melodies of Scotland, available through Google Books.
A principal source of music for the Scottish variant of the instrument can be found in The Ancient Melodies of Scotland by William Dauney. This book is a history of Scottish music, and contains some information on the mandora. Dauney makes it clear that the mandora the Skene Manuscript tunes are written for is the same instrument that Mersenne called the "mandore".[34][35]

Name controversy[edit]
While the mandore and mandora have been considered equivalent names for the same treble-ranged instrument,  mandora has also found use as the name for a bass-ranged lute, the gallichon.[3][36]
The instrument has also been mistakenly called mandöraen instead of mandörgen by modern readers of Praetorius' book. However, the "raen" in the word is actually "rgen". The error is due to a lithographic fault in reproducing plate 16; that fault truncated the g into an a.[37] The error can be seen when comparing two different versions of the plate (compare the two versions in the file history).

Composers[edit]
Renaissance mandore: Martin Agricola, Pierre Brunet, Adrian Le Roy, Ottomar Luscinius, Sebastian Virdung et al.
17th century mandore: François de Chancy, Henry François de Gallot, Valentin Strobel, Maitrise von François-Pierre Goy et al.
18th century mandora: Johann Georg Albrechtsberger, Giuseppe Antonio Brescianello, Johann Paul Schiffelholz et al.
Bibliography[edit]
D. Gill: "Mandore and Calachon", FoMRHI Quarterly, no. 19 (1980), p. 61–63
D. Gill: "Mandores and Colachons", Galpin Society Journal, p. xxxiv (1981), p. 130–41
D. Gill: "Alternative Lutes: the Identity of 18th-Century Mandores and Gallichones", The Lute, xxvi (1986), p. 51–62
D. Gill: "The Skene Mandore Manuscript", The Lute, xxviii (1988), 19–33
D. Gill: "Intabulating for the Mandore: Some Notes on a 17th-Century Workbook", The Lute, xxxiv (1994), p. 28–36
C. Hunt: "History of the Mandolin"; Mandolin World News Vol 4, No. 3, 1981
A. Koczirz: "Zur Geschichte der Mandorlaute"; Die Gitarre 2 (1920/21), p. 21–36
Marin Mersenne: Harminie Universelle: The Books on Instruments, Roger E. Chapman trans. (The Hague, 1957)
E. Pohlmann: Laute, Theorbe, Chitarrone; Bremen, 1968 (1982)
M. Prynne: "James Talbot's Manuscript, IV: Plucked Strings – the Lute Family", Galpin Society Journal, xiv (1961), p. 52–68
James Tyler and Paul Sparks: The Early Mandolin: the Mandolino and the Neapolitan Mandoline, Oxford Early Music Series, Clarendon Press 1992, ISBN 978-0198163022
James Tyler: The Early Guitar: a History and Handbook Oxford Early Music Series, Oxford University Press, 1980, ISBN 978-0193231825
References[edit]


^ Dossena, Luigi (7 September 2014). "Historia et imago Cremae. La vita di Giovanni Vailati, il Paganini del mandolino: dai caffè cremaschi ai teatri d'Europa [translation: Historia et imago Cremae. The life of Giovanni Vailati, the Paganini of the mandolin: from the cremaschi cafés to the theaters of Europe]". cremonaonline.it. Retrieved 11 June 2018. ...on December 2, 1852 in Parma at the Regio theater he performed a single string music from his mandolin, on a Lombard-type mandolin inspired by sixteenth-century instruments still unformed and rough. It was a soprano lute, very small, having the semblance of a paunchy half-egg which he later replaced with a mandolin inspired by Hispanic Bandurria- type models...

^ a b c d McDonald 2008, pp. 7–8

^ a b c Mandore [Mandorre]. ISBN 978-0-19-974339-1. Retrieved 2015-03-21. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help)

^ a b McDonald 2008, p. 7

^ a b c d Tyler 1981, pp. 22–31 "...the small, lute-like instrument of the Middle Ages called, until recently, the 'mandora' by modern writers, was originally called the 'gittern'...generally used for the small, four-course, renaissance guitar—but it was still also occasionally used (until well into the 17th century) for the instrument that, during the 16th century, became known as the 'mandore'."

^ a b c Randel, Don Michael (2003). The Harvard Dictionary of Music. Harvard University Press reference library. Vol. 16. Harvard University Press. p. 484. ISBN 978-0-674-01163-2. Mandora, mandore, mandola [Fr. mandore; Ger. Mandoër, Mandürichen, Mandourlauten; It. Mandola; Sp. vandola]. (1) A lutelike instrument developed from the medieval *gittern. ... (2) An 18th-century Austrian and German eight course hybrid combining a lute body and pegbox with a guitar neck. This was played and tuned like the guitar: C D E A d g b e'. ...

^ a b c Tyler 1981, pp. 22–23 [1–2] "... it is to the Spaniard Juan Bermudo that we must turn... in his Declaration de instrumentos (1555), Bermudo speaks of the bandurria...the early bandurria, a small lute- or rebec-like instrument with 4th and 5th tunings, was the mandore...The Spanish sources seem to suggest that the early bandurria... was the mandore..."

^ a b Nikolova, Kőnemann (2000). The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Musical Instruments From all eras and regions of the world. Bulgaria: Kibea Publishing Company. p. 164. ISBN 3-8290-6079-3.

^ Whitney, William Dwight (1906). The Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia. New York: The Century Company. p. 3606. mandola, mandora (man-do'la, -ra), n. [It.:see mandolin.] An older and larger variety of the mandolin. Compare pandura. Also mandore.

^ Tyler 1981, p. 23 [2].

^ Tyler, James (2001). "Mandore". In Sadie, Stanley; Tyrrell, John (eds.). The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (2nd ed.). London: Macmillan Publishers. ISBN 978-1-56159-239-5.‎

^ Lambert, Jeffrey C. François Chancy's Tablature de Mandore (PDF) (A Major Document). Retrieved 2013-06-23.

^ a b "Mandore Boissart". The Victoria and Albert Museum. Archived from the original on 2011-01-09. Retrieved 2010-11-14.

^ Didier Le Roux & Jean-Paul Bazin. "History of the Mandolin: The French baroque : the mandore". ensemble-gabriele-leone.org. Retrieved 2010-11-06.[dead link‍]

^ a b Lawson, Colin; Stowell, Robin (February 16, 2012). The Cambridge History of Musical Performance. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781316184424 – via Google Books.

^ Boase, Roger (March 2, 1977). The Origin and Meaning of Courtly Love: A Critical Study of European Scholarship. Manchester University Press. ISBN 9780719006562 – via Google Books.

^ a b c Tyler & Sparks 1992, pp. 6–7

^ a b c Mersenne & Chapman 1957, p. 130

^ a b "Mandore [Mandorre]". Retrieved 2010-11-14.

^ McDonald 2008, pp. 9–10

^ a b c Mersenne & Chapman 1957, p. 134

^ Praetorius, Michael; Crookes, David Z (1986) [1614]. Syntagma Musicum. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-816260-5.

^ McDonald 2008, pp. 8–10

^ a b Mersenne & Chapman 1957, p. 131

^ a b c Dauney, William (1838). "The Skene Manuscript". Ancient Scotish Melodies, from A Manuscript of the Reign of King James VI. with An Introductory Enquiry illustrative of the History of the Music of Scotland. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Printing and Publishing Company. (the Skene manuscript)

^ Mersenne & Chapman 1957, p. 133

^ Tyler & Sparks 1992, p. 5

^ a b "Mandolin [mandola, mandoline, mandolino]". The Groves Dictionary of Musical Instruments. Retrieved 2015-03-22.

^ McDonald 2008, p. 10

^ McDonald 2008, p. 8

^ a b McDonald 2008, p. 11

^ a b McDonald 2008, p. 14

^ McDonald 2008, pp. 11, 14

^ Mersenne & Chapman 1957, pp. 130–134.

^ Dauney, William (1838). The Ancient Melodies of Scotland. Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh Printing Company. pp. 111–112.

^ Alburger, Mark. "Giorgio Mianerio (1535–1582) — Old and New". Music History, Thursday January 13, 8535. Retrieved 2010-11-11.

^ "Mandore [Mandorre]". musicviva.com. Retrieved 2010-11-20.


McDonald, Graham (2008). The Mandolin Project. Jamison, Australia: Graham McDonald Stringed Instruments. ISBN 978-0-9804762-0-0.
Mersenne, Marin; Chapman, Roger E (1957) [1635]. Harmonie Universelle. The Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
Tyler, James (1981). "The Mandore in the 16th and 17th Centuries" (PDF). Early Music. 9 (1) (published January 1981): 22–31. doi:10.1093/earlyj/9.1.22. JSTOR 3126587.
Tyler, James; Sparks, Paul (1992). The Early Mandolin. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-816302-9.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mandore (instrument).

Research papers and books[edit]
A Reprint of François Chancy's Tablature de Mandore, along with modern sheet music with Mandore tabs, and a research paper on the Mandore by Jeffrey C. Lambert
Important academic paper by James Tyler laying out a detailed view of the mandore's history
Online text of The Ancient Melodies of Scotland by William Dauney, with mandore tablature from the Skene manuscript
Web pages[edit]
Page (in French) explores differences between Mandore and Mandolino
Page by the Ensemble Gabriele Leone compares "French Baroque" mandore with other baroque instruments
Many pictures of vintage mandolins and pre-mandolins laid out side by side
Meteora, Barlaam Monastery, King David's XVI-cent. fresco with mandore.
Medici's court, musician with mandore.
Meteora, Barlaam Monastery, King David's XVI-cent. fresco with mandore.
Brief history with pictures; shows relationship between mandolin, gittern and mandore
Picture of a Stradivarius mandolin or mandolino, from Cremona, Italy, 1680; very similar to the mandore
Comparisons of mandolin type instruments
Music for the mandore
Mandore's History
Old tabulatures for mandore
Museum Examples[edit]
Good picture of a mandore in the Victoria and Albert Museum, England
About mandore in the Victoria and Albert Museum
Page from the French museum Médiathèque de la Cité de la musique, Paris with a 17th-century mandore, with pictures from several angles
Another page from the French museum Médiathèque de la Cité de la musique, Paris featuring a 17th-century mandore, with pictures from several angles
A 1655 mandore, in the collection of the Future Museum, Southwest Scotland
A 1717 mandore by Joannes Schorn of Salisburgh in the collection of the University of Edinburgh Musical Instruments Museum
An 18th-century mandore labelled Michel Angelo Bergonzi figlio di Carlo fece in Gremona l'anno 1755, from the collection of the Future Museum, Southwest Scotland
Another Bergonzi mandore in the collection of the University of Edinburgh Musical Instruments Museums Edinburgh
Another 18th-century mandore from the Future Museum, Southwest Scotland, labelled Petrus Merighi fecit Parmae 1767
vteMandolinGeneral topics
History
North America
Players
Playing traditions
Society (Peterborough)
Family instruments
Bandola
Bandolin
Bandora
Bandurria
Cittern
Gittern
Irish bouzouki
Laouto
Mandobass
Mandocello
Mandola
Mandolin-banjo
Mandolone
Mandolute
Mandore
Mandriola
Octave mandolin
Orpharion
Resonator mandolin
Manufacturers
Beltona
Breedlove
Collings
Dean
Del Vecchio
Epiphone
Giannini
Gibson
Harmony
Hohner
Hora
Ibanez
Levin
Martin
Michael Kelly
National
National Reso-Phonic
Oscar Schmidt
Ovation
Regal
Seagull
Stagg
Tacoma
Tanglewood
Weymann

 Category
 Commons

vteRenaissance musicList of Renaissance composersEarly (1400–1470)
Alexander Agricola
Gilles Binchois
Antoine Busnois
Loyset Compère
Guillaume Du Fay
John Dunstaple
Walter Frye
Heinrich Isaac
Jean Japart
Johannes Martini
Johannes Ockeghem
Leonel Power
Johannes Tinctoris
Gaspar van Weerbeke
Oswald von Wolkenstein
Middle (1470–1530)
Martin Agricola
Antoine Brumel
Thomas Crecquillon
Antonius Divitis
Costanzo Festa
Antoine de Févin
Clément Janequin
Cristóbal de Morales
Jean Mouton
Jacob Obrecht
Josquin des Prez
Pierre de la Rue
John Taverner
Philippe Verdelot
Adrian Willaert
Late (1530)
Jacques Arcadelt
William Byrd
Antonio de Cabezón
Jacobus Clemens
Andrea Gabrieli
Nicolas Gombert
Claude Goudimel
Francisco Guerrero
Claude Le Jeune
Orlando di Lasso
Vicente Lusitano
Pierre de Manchicourt
Hans Neusidler
Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina
Costanzo Porta
Cipriano de Rore
Thomas Tallis
Christopher Tye
Tomás Luis de Victoria
Giaches de Wert
Mannerism and Transition to Baroquec.1600
Gregorio Allegri
Thomas Campion
John Cooper
John Dowland
Girolamo Frescobaldi
Alfonso Fontanelli
Giovanni Gabrieli
Carlo Gesualdo
Orlando Gibbons
Hans Leo Hassler
Alonso Lobo
Luzzasco Luzzaschi
Giovanni de Macque
Luca Marenzio
Claudio Monteverdi
Thomas Morley
Jacopo Peri
Michael Praetorius
Philippe Rogier
Heinrich Schütz
Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck
Composition schools
Burgundian
Colorists
English Madrigal School
English Virginalist School
Florentine Camerata
Franco-Flemish
Roman
Venetian
Musical forms
Carol
Intermedio
Madrigal
Magnificat
Mass
Offertory
Pavane
Traditions
British
Cyprus
Elizabethan
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Music publishing
Hieronymus Andreae
Andrea Antico
Pierre Attaingnant
Vittorio Baldini
Jacob Bathen
Valerio Dorico
Antonio Gardano
Ottaviano Petrucci
Petrus Phalesius the Elder
Girolamo Scotto
Tielman Susato
Thomas Vautrollier
Background
Early music
Renaissance
Art
Architecture
Dance
Literature
Philosophy
 ← Medieval musicBaroque music → 
 Category
 Portal
vteLuteTypes by regionAfrica
Goje
Xalam
Asia
Barbat
Bipa
Biwa
Dombra
Dutar
Dramyin
Komuz
Kutiyapi
Oud
Pipa
Qanbūs
Qinqin
Rubab
Sanshin
Sanxian
Sapeh
Setar
Shamisen
Sitar
Tanbur
Tar
Veena
Yueqin
Europe
Angélique
Archlute
Cobza
Kobza
Mandore
Mandora
Swedish lute
Torban
Theorbo
Vihuela
Related instruments
Citole
Cittern
English guitar
Gittern
Guitarra latina
Guitarra morisca
Laúd
Other topics
Composers
Manufacturers
Players
 Commons




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mandore_(instrument)&oldid=1266758799"
Categories: LutesEarly musical instrumentsMandolin family instrumentsNecked bowl lutesFrench musical instrumentsHidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignoredWikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove templateWikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template without a link parameterAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from July 2013Articles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataPages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesCommons category link is on Wikidata






 This page was last edited on 2 January 2025, at 03:02 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Mandore (instrument)




























8 languages


Add topic
















