



Trumpet - Wikipedia



































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
Etymology








2
History








3
Construction








4
Types








5
Playing




Toggle Playing subsection





5.1
Fingering










6
Mutes








7
Range








8
Extended technique




Toggle Extended technique subsection





8.1
Instruction and method books










9
Players








10
Repertoire




Toggle Repertoire subsection





10.1
Solos










11
In art








12
See also








13
References




Toggle References subsection





13.1
Notes








13.2
Bibliography










14
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Trumpet



124 languages




AfrikaansAlemannischአማርኛÆngliscالعربيةAragonésAsturianuAvañe'ẽAzərbaycancaবাংলা閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)БългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàČeštinaCymraegDanskDeitschDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGàidhligGalego客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHrvatskiIdoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaIsiZuluÍslenskaItalianoעבריתJawaKabɩyɛქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenКыргызчаLatinaLatviešuLietuviųLingálaLombardMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംمصرىBahasa MelayuМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNāhuatlNederlandsNedersaksiesनेपाल भाषा日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPicardPiemontèisPlattdüütschPolskiPortuguêsQırımtatarcaRomânăRuna SimiРусиньскыйРусскийScotsSeelterskShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்తెలుగుไทยТоҷикӣᏣᎳᎩTürkçeУкраїнськаاردوTiếng ViệtVolapükVõroWest-VlamsWinaray吴语ייִדיש粵語Žemaitėška中文Obolo

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Brass instrument
"Trumpeter" redirects here. For a list of trumpet players, see List of trumpeters. For other uses, see Trumpeter (disambiguation) and Trumpet (disambiguation).
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Trumpet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this message)


TrumpetTrumpet in B♭Brass instrumentClassification
WindBrassAerophoneHornbostel–Sachs classification423.233(Valved aerophone sounded by lip vibration)Playing range


Written range (lower and higher notes are possible—see § Range)Related instruments
flugelhorn, cornet, cornett, flumpet, bugle, natural trumpet, bass trumpet, post horn, Roman tuba, buccina, cornu, lituus, shofar, dord, dung chen, sringa, shankha, lur, didgeridoo, alphorn, Russian horns, serpent, ophicleide, piccolo trumpet, horn, alto horn, baritone horn, pocket trumpet, slide trumpet
Part of a series onMusical instruments
Woodwinds
Bagpipes
Bassoon
Contrabassoon
Cor anglais
Clarinet
Flute
Oboe
Piccolo
Saxophone

Brass instruments
Baritone horn
Cornet
Euphonium
Flugelhorn
French horn
Mellophone
Tenor horn
Trombone
Trumpet
Tuba

String instrumentsBowed
Cello
Double bass
Huqin
Hurdy-gurdy
Viola
Violin
Plucked

Banjo
Guitar
Bass guitar
Guzheng
Koto
Lyre
Mandolin
Harp
Shamisen
Sitar
Tambura
Ukulele
Zither

Percussion
Bass drum
Bell
Carillon
Celesta
Cymbals
Glockenspiel
Gong
Handbell
Lithophone
Marimba
Mridangam
Snare drum
Steelpan
Timpani
Triangle
Tubaphone
Tubular bells
Vibraphone
Xylophone

Keyboards
Clavichord
Electronic keyboard
Harmonium
Harpsichord
Organ
Piano
Spinet
Virginals
vte
The trumpet is a brass instrument commonly used in classical and jazz ensembles. The trumpet group ranges from the piccolo trumpet—with the highest register in the brass family—to the bass trumpet, pitched one octave below the standard B♭ or C trumpet.
Trumpet-like instruments have historically been used as signaling devices in battle or hunting, with examples dating back to the 2nd Millenium BC.[1] They began to be used as musical instruments only in the late 14th or early 15th century.[2] Trumpets are used in art music styles, appearing in orchestras, concert bands, chamber music groups, and jazz ensembles. They are also common in popular music and are generally included in school bands. Sound is produced by vibrating the lips in a mouthpiece,[3] which starts a standing wave in the air column of the instrument. Since the late 15th century, trumpets have primarily been constructed of brass tubing, usually bent twice into a rounded rectangular shape.
There are many distinct types of trumpet. The most common is a transposing instrument pitched in B♭ with a tubing length of about 1.48 m (4 ft 10 in). The cornet is similar to the trumpet but has a conical bore (the trumpet has a cylindrical bore) and its tubing is generally wound differently. Early trumpets did not provide means to change the length of tubing, whereas modern instruments generally have three (or sometimes four) valves in order to change their pitch. Most trumpets have valves of the piston type, while some have the rotary type. The use of rotary-valved trumpets is more common in orchestral settings (especially in German and German-style orchestras), although this practice varies by country. A musician who plays the trumpet is called a trumpet player or trumpeter.[4]


Etymology[edit]
Trio of trumpeters in Toledo, Ohio, approximately 1920
The English word trumpet was first used in the late 14th century.[5] The word came from Old French trompette, which is a diminutive of trompe.[5] The word trump, meaning trumpet, was first used in English in 1300. The word comes from Old French trompe 'long, tube-like musical wind instrument' (c. 1100s), cognate with Provençal tromba, Italian tromba, all probably from a Germanic source (compare Old High German trumpa, Old Norse trumba 'trumpet'), of imitative origin."[6]

History[edit]
Main article: History of the trumpet
Silver and gold plated trumpet and its wooden mute from the tomb of Tutankhamun (1326–1336 BC)
Ceramic trumpet, AD 300, Larco Museum Collection Lima, Peru
Trumpet, 17th century, decorated with large tassels
The earliest trumpets date back to 2000 BC and earlier. The bronze and silver Tutankhamun's trumpets from his grave in Egypt, bronze lurs from Scandinavia, and metal trumpets from China date back to this period.[7] Trumpets from the Oxus civilization (3rd millennium BC) of Central Asia have decorated swellings in the middle, yet are made out of one sheet of metal, which is considered a technical wonder for its time.[8]
The Salpinx was a straight trumpet 62 inches (1,600 mm) long, made of bone or bronze. Homer’s Iliad (9th or 8th century BCE) contain the earliest reference to its sound and further, frequent descriptions are found throughout the Classical Period.[9] Salpinx contests were a part of the original Olympic Games.[10] The Shofar, made from a ram horn and the Hatzotzeroth, made of metal, are both mentioned in the Bible. They were said to have been played in Solomon's Temple around 3,000 years ago. They are still used on certain religious days.[10]
The Moche people of ancient Peru depicted trumpets in their art going back to AD 300.[11] The earliest trumpets were signaling instruments used for military or religious purposes, rather than music in the modern sense;[12] and the modern bugle continues this signaling tradition.

Reproduction baroque trumpet by Michael Laird
Improvements to instrument design and metal making in the late Middle Ages and Renaissance led to an increased usefulness of the trumpet as a musical instrument. The natural trumpets of this era consisted of a single coiled tube without valves and therefore could only produce the notes of a single overtone series. Changing keys required the player to change crooks of the instrument.[10]  The development of the upper, "clarino" register by specialist trumpeters—notably Cesare Bendinelli—would lend itself well to the Baroque era, also known as the "Golden Age of the natural trumpet." During this period, a vast body of music was written for virtuoso trumpeters. The art was revived in the mid-20th century and natural trumpet playing is again a thriving art around the world. Many modern players in Germany and the UK who perform Baroque music use a version of the natural trumpet fitted with three or four vent holes to aid in correcting out-of-tune notes in the harmonic series.[13]
The melody-dominated homophony of the classical and romantic periods relegated the trumpet to a secondary role by most major composers owing to the limitations of the natural trumpet. Berlioz wrote in 1844:


Notwithstanding the real loftiness and distinguished nature of its quality of tone, there are few instruments that have been more degraded (than the trumpet). Down to Beethoven and Weber, every composer – not excepting Mozart – persisted in confining it to the unworthy function of filling up, or in causing it to sound two or three commonplace rhythmical formulae.[14]


Construction[edit]
Trumpet valve bypass (depressed)
The trumpet is constructed of brass tubing bent twice into a rounded oblong shape.[15] As with all brass instruments, sound is produced by blowing air through slightly separated lips, producing a "buzzing" sound into the mouthpiece and starting a standing wave vibration in the air column inside the trumpet. The player can select the pitch from a range of overtones or harmonics by changing the lip aperture and tension (known as the embouchure).
The mouthpiece has a circular rim, which provides a comfortable environment for the lips' vibration. Directly behind the rim is the cup, which channels the air into a much smaller opening (the back bore or shank) that tapers out slightly to match the diameter of the trumpet's lead pipe. The dimensions of these parts of the mouthpiece affect the timbre or quality of sound, the ease of playability, and player comfort. Generally, the wider and deeper the cup, the darker the sound and timbre.

B♭ trumpet, disassembled
Modern trumpets have three (or, infrequently, four) piston valves, each of which increases the length of tubing when engaged, thereby lowering the pitch. The first valve lowers the instrument's pitch by a whole step (two semitones), the second valve by a half step (one semitone), and the third valve by one and a half steps (three semitones). Having three valves provides eight possible valve combinations (including "none"), but only seven different tubing lengths, because the third valve alone gives essentially the same tubing length as the 1–2 combination. (In practice there is often a deliberately designed slight difference between "1–2" and "3", and in that case trumpet players will select the alternative that gives the best tuning for the particular note being played.) When a fourth valve is present, as with some piccolo trumpets, it usually lowers the pitch a perfect fourth (five semitones). Used singly and in combination these valves make the instrument fully chromatic, i.e., able to play all twelve pitches of classical music. For more information about the different types of valves, see Brass instrument valves.
The overall pitch of the trumpet can be raised or lowered by the use of the tuning slide. Pulling the slide out lowers the pitch; pushing the slide in raises it. Pitch can be "bent"  using the embouchure only.[16]
To overcome the problems of intonation and reduce the use of the slides, Renold Schilke designed the tuning-bell trumpet. Removing the usual brace between the bell and a valve body allows the use of a sliding bell; the player may then tune the horn with the bell while leaving the slide pushed in, or nearly so, thereby improving intonation and overall response.[17]
A trumpet becomes a closed tube when the player presses it to the lips; therefore, the instrument only naturally produces every other overtone of the harmonic series. The shape of the bell makes the missing overtones audible.[18] Most notes in the series are slightly out of tune and modern trumpets have slide mechanisms for the first and third valves with which the player can compensate by throwing (extending) or retracting one or both slides, using the left thumb and ring finger for the first and third valve slides respectively.
Trumpets can be constructed from other materials, including plastic.[19]

Types[edit]
Trumpeters, Royal Palace, Sarahan, Himachal Pradesh, India
Tibetan trumpets stored at Tagthok Monastery, Ladakh
The most common type is the B♭ trumpet, but A, C, D, E♭, E, low F, and G trumpets are also available. The C trumpet is most common in American orchestral playing, where it is used alongside the B♭ trumpet. Orchestral trumpet players are adept at transposing music at sight, frequently playing music written for the A, B♭, D, E♭, E or F trumpet as well as for the B, C♯, F♯ or G trumpet (which is used more rarely) on the C trumpet or B♭ trumpet.

Piccolo trumpet in B♭, with swappable leadpipes to tune the instrument to B♭ (shorter) or A (longer)
The smallest trumpets are referred to as piccolo trumpets. The most common models are built to play in both B♭ and A, with separate leadpipes for each key. The tubing in the B♭ piccolo trumpet is one-half the length of that in a standard B♭ trumpet making it sound an octave higher. Piccolo trumpets in G, F and C are also manufactured, but are less common. Almost all piccolo trumpets have four valves instead of three—the fourth valve usually lowers the pitch by a fourth, making some lower notes accessible and creating alternate fingerings for certain trills. Maurice André, Håkan Hardenberger, David Mason, and Wynton Marsalis are some well-known trumpet players known for their virtuosity on the piccolo trumpet.

Pocket trumpet
Trumpet in C with rotary valves
Trumpets pitched in the key of low G are also called sopranos, or soprano bugles, after their adaptation from military bugles. Traditionally used in drum and bugle corps, sopranos employ either rotary valves or piston valves.
The bass trumpet is at the same pitch as a trombone and is usually played by a trombone player,[4] although its music is written in treble clef. Most bass trumpets are pitched in either C or B♭. The C bass trumpet sounds an octave lower than written, and the  B♭ bass sounds a major ninth (B♭) lower, making them both transposing instruments.
The historical slide trumpet was probably first developed in the late 14th century for use in alta cappella wind bands. Deriving from early straight trumpets, the Renaissance slide trumpet was essentially a natural trumpet with a sliding leadpipe. This single slide was awkward, as the entire instrument moved, and the range of the slide was probably no more than a major third. Originals were probably pitched in D, to fit with shawms in D and G, probably at a typical pitch standard near A=466 Hz. No known instruments from this period survive, so the details—and even the existence—of a Renaissance slide trumpet is a matter of debate among scholars. While there is documentation (written and artistic) of its existence, there is also conjecture that its slide would have been impractical.[20]
Some slide trumpet designs saw use in England in the 18th century.[21]
The pocket trumpet is a compact B♭ trumpet. The bell is usually smaller than a standard trumpet bell and the tubing is more tightly wound to reduce the instrument size without reducing the total tube length. Its design is not standardized, and the quality of various models varies greatly. It can have a unique warm sound and voice-like articulation. Since many pocket trumpet models suffer from poor design as well as poor manufacturing, the intonation, tone color and dynamic range of such instruments are severely hindered. Professional-standard instruments are, however, available. While they are not a substitute for the full-sized instrument, they can be useful in certain contexts. The jazz musician Don Cherry was renowned for his playing of the pocket instrument.
The tubing of the bell section of a herald trumpet is straight, making it long enough to accommodate a hanging banner. This instrument is mostly used for ceremonial events such as parades and fanfares.
David Monette designed the flumpet in 1989 for jazz musician Art Farmer. It is a hybrid of a trumpet and a flugelhorn, pitched in B♭ and using three piston valves.[22]
Other variations include rotary-valve, or German, trumpets (which are commonly used in professional German and Austrian orchestras), alto and Baroque trumpets, and the Vienna valve trumpet (primarily used in Viennese brass ensembles and orchestras such as the Vienna Philharmonic and Mnozil Brass).
The trumpet is often confused with its close relative the cornet, which has a more conical tubing shape compared to the trumpet's more cylindrical tube. This, along with additional bends in the cornet's tubing, gives the cornet a slightly mellower tone, but the instruments are otherwise nearly identical. They have the same length of tubing and, therefore, the same pitch, so music written for one of them is playable on the other. Another relative, the flugelhorn, has tubing that is even more conical than that of the cornet, and an even mellower tone. It is sometimes supplied with a fourth valve to improve the intonation of some lower notes.

Playing[edit]
See also: Embouchure
Fingering[edit]
On any modern trumpet, cornet, or flugelhorn, pressing the valves indicated by the numbers below produces the written notes shown. "Open" means all valves up, "1" means first valve, "1–2" means first and second valve simultaneously, and so on. The sounding pitch depends on the transposition of the instrument. Engaging the fourth valve, if present, usually drops any of these pitches by a perfect fourth as well. Within each overtone series, the different pitches are attained by changing the embouchure. 

A step = a tone; a half step = a semitone
Each overtone series on the trumpet begins with the first overtone—the fundamental of each overtone series cannot be produced except as a pedal tone. Notes in parentheses are the sixth overtone, representing a pitch with a frequency of seven times that of the fundamental; while this pitch is close to the note shown, it is flat relative to equal temperament, and use of those fingerings is generally avoided.
The fingering schema arises from the length of each valve's tubing (a longer tube produces a lower pitch). Valve "1" increases the tubing length enough to lower the pitch by one whole step, valve "2" by one half step, and valve "3" by one and a half steps.[23] This scheme and the nature of the overtone series create the possibility of alternate fingerings for certain notes. For example, third-space "C" can be produced with no valves engaged (standard fingering) or with valves 2–3. Also, any note produced with 1–2 as its standard fingering can also be produced with valve 3 – each drops the pitch by 1+1⁄2 steps. Alternate fingerings may be used to improve facility in certain passages, or to aid in intonation. Extending the third valve slide when using the fingerings 1–3 or 1-2-3 further lowers the pitch slightly to improve intonation.[24]
Some of the partials of the harmonic series that a modern B♭ trumpet can play for each combination of valves pressed are in tune with 12-tone equal temperament and some are not.[25]

Mutes[edit]
Main article: Mute (music) § Brass
Trumpet with a straight mute inserted. Below, left to right: straight, wah-wah (harmon), and cup mutes.
Various types of mutes can be placed in or over the bell, which decreases volume and changes timbre.[26] Trumpets have a wide selection of mutes: common ones include the straight mute, cup mute, harmon mute (wah-wah or wow-wow mute, among other names[27]), plunger, bucket mute, and practice mute.[28] A straight mute is generally used when the type of mute is not specified.[27] Jazz and commercial music call for a wider range of mutes than most classical music[26] and many mutes were invented for jazz orchestrators.[29]
Mutes can be made of many materials, including fiberglass, plastic, cardboard, metal, and "stone lining", a trade name of the Humes & Berg company.[30] They are often held in place with cork.[26][31] To better keep the mute in place, players sometimes dampen the cork by blowing warm, moist air on it.[26]
The straight mute is conical and constructed of either metal (usually aluminum[27])—which produces a bright, piercing sound—or another material, which produces a darker, stuffier sound.[32][33] The cup mute is shaped like a straight mute with an additional, bell-facing cup at the end, and produces a darker tone than a straight mute.[34] The harmon mute is made of metal (usually aluminum or copper[27]) and consists of a "stem" inserted into a large chamber.[34] The stem can be extended or removed to produce different timbres, and waving one's hand in front of the mute produces a "wah-wah" sound, hence the mute's colloquial name.[34]

Range[edit]
Sound of a trumpet – Warsaw Castle, Poland.
Using standard technique, the lowest note is the written F♯ below middle C.[citation needed] There is no actual limit to how high brass instruments can play, but fingering charts generally go up to the high C two octaves above middle C. Several trumpeters have achieved fame for their proficiency in the extreme high register, among them Maynard Ferguson, Cat Anderson, Dizzy Gillespie, Doc Severinsen, John Madrid, and more recently Wayne Bergeron, Louis Dowdeswell, Thomas Gansch, James Morrison, Jon Faddis and Arturo Sandoval. It is also possible to produce pedal tones below the low F♯, which is a device occasionally employed in the contemporary repertoire for the instrument.

Extended technique[edit]
Contemporary music for the trumpet makes wide uses of extended trumpet techniques.
Flutter tonguing: The trumpeter rolls the tip of the tongue (as if rolling an "R" in Spanish) to produce a 'growling like' tone. This technique is widely employed by composers like Berio and Stockhausen.
Growling: Simultaneously playing tone and using the back of the tongue to vibrate the uvula, creating a distinct sound.  Most trumpet players will use a plunger with this technique to achieve a particular sound heard in a lot of Chicago Jazz of the 1950s.
Double tonguing: The player articulates using the syllables ta-ka ta-ka ta-ka.
Triple tonguing: The same as double tonguing, but with the syllables ta-ta-ka ta-ta-ka ta-ta-ka.
Doodle tongue: The trumpeter tongues as if saying the word doodle. This is a very faint tonguing similar in sound to a valve tremolo.
Glissando: Trumpeters can slide between notes by depressing the valves halfway and changing the lip tension. Modern repertoire makes extensive use of this technique.
Vibrato: It is often regulated in contemporary repertoire through specific notation. Composers can call for everything from fast, slow or no vibrato to actual rhythmic patterns played with vibrato.
Pedal tone: Composers have written notes as low as two-and-a-half octaves below the low F♯ at the bottom of the standard range. Extreme low pedals are produced by slipping the lower lip out of the mouthpiece. Claude Gordon assigned pedals as part of his trumpet practice routines, that were a systematic expansion on his lessons with Herbert L. Clarke. The technique was pioneered by Bohumir Kryl.[35]
Microtones: Composers such as Scelsi and Stockhausen have made wide use of the trumpet's ability to play microtonally. Some instruments feature a fourth valve that provides a quarter-tone step between each note. The jazz musician Ibrahim Maalouf uses such a trumpet, invented by his father to make it possible to play Arab maqams.
Valve tremolo: Many notes on the trumpet can be played in several different valve combinations. By alternating between valve combinations on the same note, a tremolo effect can be created. Berio makes extended use of this technique in his Sequenza X.
Noises: By hissing, clicking, or breathing through the instrument, the trumpet can be made to resonate in ways that do not sound at all like a trumpet. Noises may require amplification.
Preparation: Composers have called for trumpeters to play under water, or with certain slides removed. It is increasingly common for composers to specify all sorts of preparations for trumpet. Extreme preparations involve alternate constructions, such as double bells and extra valves.
Split tone: Trumpeters can produce more than one tone simultaneously by vibrating the two lips at different speeds. The interval produced is usually an octave or a fifth.
Lip-trill or shake: Also known as "lip-slurs". By rapidly varying air speed, but not changing the depressed valves, the pitch can vary quickly between adjacent harmonic partials. Shakes and lip-trills can vary in speed, and in the distance between the partials. However, lip-trills and shakes usually involve the next partial up from the written note.
Multi-phonics: Playing a note and "humming" a different note simultaneously. For example, sustaining a middle C and humming a major 3rd "E" at the same time.
Circular breathing: A technique wind players use to produce uninterrupted tone, without pauses for breaths. The player puffs up the cheeks, storing air, then breathes in rapidly through the nose while using the cheeks to continue pushing air outwards.

Instruction and method books[edit]
One trumpet method is Jean-Baptiste Arban's Complete Conservatory Method for Trumpet (Cornet).[36] Other well-known method books include Technical Studies by Herbert L. Clarke,[37] Grand Method by Louis Saint-Jacome, Daily Drills and Technical Studies by Max Schlossberg, and methods by Ernest S. Williams, Claude Gordon, Charles Colin, James Stamp, and Louis Davidson.[38] A common method book for beginners is the Walter Beeler's Method for the Cornet, and there have been several instruction books written by virtuoso Allen Vizzutti.[39] Merri Franquin wrote a Complete Method for Modern Trumpet,[40] which fell into obscurity for much of the twentieth century until public endorsements by Maurice André revived interest in this work.[41]

Players[edit]
Gottfried Reiche, chief trumpeter for Johann Sebastian Bach in Leipzig
Main article: List of trumpeters
In early jazz, Louis Armstrong was well known for his virtuosity and his improvisations on the Hot Five and Hot Seven recordings, and his switch from cornet to trumpet is often cited as heralding the trumpet's dominance over the cornet in jazz.[4][42] Dizzy Gillespie was a gifted improviser with an extremely high (but musical) range, building on the style of Roy Eldridge but adding new layers of harmonic complexity. Gillespie had an enormous impact on virtually every subsequent trumpeter, both by the example of his playing and as a mentor to younger musicians. Miles Davis is widely considered one of the most influential musicians of the 20th century—his style was distinctive and widely imitated. Davis' phrasing and sense of space in his solos have been models for generations of jazz musicians.[43] Cat Anderson was a trumpet player who was known for the ability to play extremely high with an even more extreme volume, who played with Duke Ellington's Big Band. Maynard Ferguson came to prominence playing in Stan Kenton's orchestra, before forming his own band in 1957. He was noted for being able to play accurately in a remarkably high register.[44]

Repertoire[edit]
Main article: Trumpet repertoire
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it.  (January 2024)
Solos[edit]
In the 1790s Anton Weidinger developed the first successful keyed trumpet, capable of playing chromatically. Joseph Haydn's Trumpet Concerto was written for him in 1796 and startled contemporary audiences by its novelty,[45] a fact shown off by some stepwise melodies played low in the instrument's range.

In art[edit]



The Last Judgment (workshop of Hieronymus Bosch) [nl], c. 1500–1510



Trumpet-Player in front of a Banquet, Gerrit Dou, c. 1660–1665



Illustration for The Trumpeter Taken Prisoner from Baby's Own Aesop, a children's edition of Aesop's fables



Louis Armstrong statue in Algiers, New Orleans



Miles Davis statue in Kielce, Poland


See also[edit]
Herald and Trumpet contest
Compositions for trumpet
Birch trumpet
Muted trumpet
Wind controller
References[edit]
Notes[edit]


^ White, H.N. (25 June 2023). "History of the Trumpet and Cornet". Trumpet-history.com. Retrieved 25 June 2023.

^ 
"History of the Trumpet (According to the New Harvard Dictionary of Music)". petrouska.com. Archived from the original on 8 June 2008. Retrieved 17 December 2014.

^ "Brass Family of Instruments: What instruments are in the Brass Family?". www.orsymphony.org. Retrieved 12 May 2020.

^ a b c Koehler 2013

^ a b "Trumpet". www.etymonline.com. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 20 May 2017.

^ "Trump". www.etymonline.com. Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 20 May 2017.

^ Edward Tarr, The Trumpet (Portland, Oregon: Amadeus Press, 1988), 20–30.

^ "Trumpet with a swelling decorated with a human head," Musée du Louvre

^ Homer, Iliad, 18. 219.

^ a b c "History of the Trumpet | Pops' Trumpet College". Bbtrumpet.com. 8 November 2017. Retrieved 19 April 2021.

^ Berrin, Katherine & Larco Museum. The Spirit of Ancient Peru:Treasures from the Museo Arqueológico Rafael Larco Herrera. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1997.

^ 
"Chicago Symphony Orchestra – Glossary – Brass instruments". cso.org. Retrieved 3 May 2008.

^ John Wallace and Alexander McGrattan, The Trumpet, Yale Musical Instrument Series (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2011): 239. ISBN 978-0-300-11230-6.

^ Berlioz, Hector (1844). Treatise on modern Instrumentation and Orchestration. Edwin F. Kalmus, NY, 1948.

^ "Trumpet, Brass Instrument". dsokids.com. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 3 May 2008.

^ Blackwell, James (11 December 2012). "Pitch Bends!". Blackwells Trumpet Basics. Retrieved 26 June 2023.

^ Bloch, Dr. Colin (August 1978). "The Bell-Tuned Trumpet". Archived from the original on 25 December 2008. Retrieved 25 February 2010.

^ D. J. Blaikley, "How a Trumpet Is Made. I. The Natural Trumpet and Horn", The Musical Times, 1 January 1910, p. 15.

^ P-trumpet

^ 
"IngentaConnect More about Renaissance slide trumpets: fact or fiction?". ingentaconnect.com. Archived from the original on 22 September 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2008.

^ 
Lessen, Martin (1997). "JSTOR: Notes, Second Series". Notes. 54 (2): 484–485. doi:10.2307/899543. ISSN 0027-4380. JSTOR 899543.

^ Koehler, Elisa (2014). Fanfares and Finesse: A Performer's Guide to Trumpet History and Literature. Indiana University Press. p. 55. ISBN 978-0-253-01179-4. Retrieved 7 December 2017.

^ Pagliaro, Michael J. (2016). The Brass Instrument Owner's Handbook. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 37–39. ISBN 978-1-4422-6862-3. OCLC 946032345.

^ Ely, Mark C.; Van Deuren, Amy E. (2009). Wind Talk for Brass: A Practical Guide to Understanding and Teaching Brass Instruments. Amy E. Van Deuren. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 8–12. ISBN 978-0-19-971631-9. OCLC 472461178.

^ Schafer, Erika. "Trumpet Tuning Tendencies Relating to the Overtone Series with Solutions". UTC Trumpet Studio. Retrieved 19 January 2023.

^ a b c d Ely 2009, p. 109.

^ a b c d Ely 2009, p. 111.

^ For the "widest selection of mutes", see Sevsay 2013, p. 125. *For a list of common mutes, see Ely 2009, p. 109.

^ Boyden, David D.; Bevan, Clifford; Page, Janet K. (20 January 2001). "Mute". Grove Music Online. doi:10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.19478. ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0. Retrieved 16 September 2020.

^ For the list of materials, see Ely 2009, p. 109.
For the origin of "stonelined mutes", see Koehler 2013, p. 173.

^ Sevsay 2013, p. 125.

^ Sevsay 2013, p. 125: "plastic (fiberglass): not as forceful as the metal mute, a bit darker in color, but still penetrating"

^ Koehler 2013, p. 173.

^ a b c Sevsay 2013, p. 126.

^ Joseph Wheeler, "Review: Edward H. Tarr, Die Trompete" The Galpin Society Journal, Vol. 31, May 1978, p. 167.

^ Arban, Jean-Baptiste (1894, 1936, 1982). Arban's Complete Conservatory Method for trumpet. Carl Fischer, Inc. ISBN 0-8258-0385-3.

^ Herbert L. Clarke (1984). Technical Studies for the Cornet, C. Carl Fischer, Inc. ISBN 0-8258-0158-3.

^ Colin, Charles and Advanced Lip Flexibilities.[full citation needed]

^ "Allen Vizzutti Official Website". www.vizzutti.com. Archived from the original on 29 October 2016. Retrieved 21 October 2016.

^ Franquin, Merri (2016) [1908]. Quinlan, Timothy (ed.). "Complete Method for Modern Trumpet". qpress.ca. Translated by Jackson, Susie.

^ Shamu, Geoffrey. "Merri Franquin and His Contribution to the Art of Trumpet Playing" (PDF). p. 20. Retrieved 11 August 2017.

^ West, Michael J. (3 November 2017). "The Cornet: Secrets of the Little Big Horn". JazzTimes.com. Retrieved 17 August 2018.

^ 
"Miles Davis, Trumpeter, Dies; Jazz Genius, 65, Defined Cool". nytimes.com. Retrieved 3 May 2008.

^ "Ferguson, Maynard". Encyclopedia of Music in Canada. The Canadian Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2 January 2008.

^ Keith Anderson, liner notes for Naxos CD 8.550243, Famous Trumpet Concertos, "Haydn's concerto, written for Weidinger in 1796, must have . At the first performance of the new concerto in Vienna in 1800 a trumpet melody was heard in a lower register than had hitherto been practicable."


Bibliography[edit]
Barclay, R. L. (1992). The art of the trumpet-maker: the materials, tools, and techniques of the seventeenth [sic] and eighteenth centuries in Nuremberg. Oxford [England]: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-816223-5.
Bate, Philip (1978). The trumpet and trombone : an outline of their history, development, and construction (2nd ed.). London: E. Benn. ISBN 0-393-02129-7.
Brownlow, James Arthur (1996). The last trumpet: a history of the English slide trumpet. Stuyvesant, N.Y.: Pendragon Press. ISBN 0-945193-81-5.
Campos, Frank Gabriel (2005). Trumpet technique. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516692-2.
Cassone, Gabriele (2009). The trumpet book (1st ed.). Varese, Italy: Zecchini. ISBN 978-88-87203-80-6.
Ely, Mark C. (2009). Wind talk for brass: a practical guide to understanding and teaching brass instruments. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-532924-7.
English, Betty Lou (1980). You can't be timid with a trumpet: notes from the orchestra (1st ed.). New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books. ISBN 0-688-41963-1.
Koehler, Elisa (2013). Dictionary for the modern trumpet player. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-8658-2.
Sherman, Roger (1979). The trumpeter's handbook: a comprehensive guide to playing and teaching the trumpet. Athens, Ohio: Accura Music. ISBN 0-918194-02-4.
Sevsay, Ertuğrul (2013). The Cambridge guide to orchestration. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 125. ISBN 978-1-107-02516-5.
Smithers, Don L. (1973). The music and history of the baroque trumpet before 1721 (1st ed.). Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press. ISBN 0-8156-2157-4.
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Trumpets.

 The dictionary definition of trumpet at Wiktionary
"Trumpet" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 27 (11th ed.). 1911.
International Trumpet Guild, international trumpet players' association with online library of scholarly journal back issues, news, jobs and other trumpet resources.
vteBrass instrumentsModern
Trumpet
Contrabass
Bass
Piccolo
Pocket trumpet
Fanfare trumpet
Firebird
Flumpet
Cornet
Soprano cornet
Horn
Bugle
French horn
German horn
Vienna horn
Wagner tuba
Trombone
Contrabass
Bass
Alto
Soprano
Superbone
Cimbasso
Saxhorn
Baritone horn
Alto/Tenor horn
Flugelhorn
Fiscorn
Kuhlohorn
Tuba
Subcontrabass tuba
Euphonium
Double bell euphonium
Antiquated
Clarion
Cornett
Cornettino
Mute cornett
Tenor cornett
Cornu
Dord
Natural horn
Post horn
Natural trumpet
Baroque trumpet
Buccina
Slide trumpet
Buccin
Sackbut
Helicon
Soprano helicon
Ophicleide
Serpent
Sudrophone
Saxtuba
Saxotromba
Bazooka
Jazzophone
Indigenous
Alphorn
Nabal
Vuvuzela
Nyele
Carnyx
Shofar
Sringa
Tibetan horn
Wazza
 Marching
Mellophone
Marching baritone horn
Marching euphonium
Trombonium
Sousaphone
Contrabass bugle
Parts/technique
Valves
Piston valve
Rotary valve
Mutes
Hand-stopping
Embouchure
Mouthpiece
Falset
Pedal tone
Bore
Valve oil
Crook
Leadpipe
Water key
Axial flow valve
Harmonic series
Ensembles
Brass band
British brass band
Balkan brass
Brass quintet
Drum and bugle corps (classic)
Drum and bugle corps (modern)
Players
(all) Trumpeters
Jazz trumpeters
Horn players
Classical trombonists
Jazz trombonists
Euphonium players
Tubists
Other
Pitch of brass instruments
Brass section
Horn section
List of euphonium, baritone horn and tenor horn manufacturers

vteRenaissance musicList of Renaissance composersEarly (1400–1470)
Alexander Agricola
Gilles Binchois
Antoine Busnois
Loyset Compère
Guillaume Du Fay
John Dunstaple
Walter Frye
Heinrich Isaac
Jean Japart
Johannes Martini
Johannes Ockeghem
Leonel Power
Johannes Tinctoris
Gaspar van Weerbeke
Oswald von Wolkenstein
Middle (1470–1530)
Martin Agricola
Antoine Brumel
Thomas Crecquillon
Antonius Divitis
Costanzo Festa
Antoine de Févin
Clément Janequin
Cristóbal de Morales
Jean Mouton
Jacob Obrecht
Josquin des Prez
Pierre de la Rue
John Taverner
Philippe Verdelot
Adrian Willaert
Late (1530)
Jacques Arcadelt
William Byrd
Antonio de Cabezón
Jacobus Clemens
Andrea Gabrieli
Nicolas Gombert
Claude Goudimel
Francisco Guerrero
Claude Le Jeune
Orlando di Lasso
Vicente Lusitano
Pierre de Manchicourt
Hans Neusidler
Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina
Costanzo Porta
Cipriano de Rore
Thomas Tallis
Christopher Tye
Tomás Luis de Victoria
Giaches de Wert
Mannerism and Transition to Baroquec.1600
Gregorio Allegri
Thomas Campion
John Cooper
John Dowland
Girolamo Frescobaldi
Alfonso Fontanelli
Giovanni Gabrieli
Carlo Gesualdo
Orlando Gibbons
Hans Leo Hassler
Alonso Lobo
Luzzasco Luzzaschi
Giovanni de Macque
Luca Marenzio
Claudio Monteverdi
Thomas Morley
Jacopo Peri
Michael Praetorius
Philippe Rogier
Heinrich Schütz
Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck
Composition schools
Burgundian
Colorists
English Madrigal School
English Virginalist School
Florentine Camerata
Franco-Flemish
Roman
Venetian
Musical forms
Carol
Intermedio
Madrigal
Magnificat
Mass
Offertory
Pavane
Traditions
British
Cyprus
Elizabethan
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Music publishing
Hieronymus Andreae
Andrea Antico
Pierre Attaingnant
Vittorio Baldini
Jacob Bathen
Valerio Dorico
Antonio Gardano
Ottaviano Petrucci
Petrus Phalesius the Elder
Girolamo Scotto
Tielman Susato
Thomas Vautrollier
Background
Early music
Renaissance
Art
Architecture
Dance
Literature
Philosophy
 ← Medieval musicBaroque music → 
 Category
 Portal
vteTrumpets and cornetsBy rangeContrabass > Bass > Standard > Soprano > PiccoloVariants
Birch
Bugle
Clarion
Cornet
Cornett
Cornettino
Mute cornett
Tenor cornett
Fanfare
Firebird
Flugelhorn
Flumpet
Lur
Natural
Pocket
Post horn
Salpinx
Slide
Parts and technique
Action
Arban method
Bore
Clarke Studies
Crook
Harmonic series
Keyed
Mouthpiece
Embouchure
Muted
Valve
Piston
Rotary
Other
Guča Trumpet Festival
History
Repertoire
Concertos
Trumpeters
Jazz

Authority control databases NationalGermanyUnited StatesFranceBnF dataJapanCzech RepublicSpainArgentinaIsraelArtistsKulturNavOtherNARAMusicBrainz instrument




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trumpet&oldid=1280901405"
Categories: B-flat instrumentsJazz instrumentsMilitary musicTrumpetsMarching band instrumentsOrchestral instrumentsHidden categories: Pages using the Score extensionAll articles with incomplete citationsArticles with incomplete citations from December 2013Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from October 2019All articles needing additional referencesUse dmy dates from March 2021Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language textArticles containing Occitan (post 1500)-language textArticles containing Italian-language textArticles containing Old High German (ca. 750-1050)-language textArticles containing Old Norse-language textAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2023Articles to be expanded from January 2024All articles to be expandedCommons category link from WikidataWikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference






 This page was last edited on 17 March 2025, at 02:14 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Trumpet




























124 languages


Add topic
















