



Vihuela - Wikipedia




































Jump to content







Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact us





		Contribute
	


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload fileSpecial pages



















Search











Search






















Appearance
















Donate

Create account

Log in








Personal tools





Donate Create account Log in





		Pages for logged out editors learn more



ContributionsTalk




























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1
History








2
Construction








3
Repertoire








4
Surviving instruments








5
Gallery








6
See also








7
Bibliography








8
Notes








9
References








10
External links


















Toggle the table of contents







Vihuela



28 languages




БългарскиBrezhonegCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolEsperantoEuskaraFrançaisItalianoLietuviųMagyarМакедонскиNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskOccitanOʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSuomiSvenskaУкраїнська中文

Edit links











ArticleTalk





English

















ReadEditView history







Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	


ReadEditView history





		General
	


What links hereRelated changesUpload filePermanent linkPage informationCite this pageGet shortened URLDownload QR code





		Print/export
	


Download as PDFPrintable version





		In other projects
	


Wikimedia CommonsWikidata item





















Appearance
move to sidebar
hide










From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Spanish string instrument


For the instrument native to Mexico and used in Mariachi groups, see Mexican vihuela.
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Vihuela" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
VihuelaVihuela/Viola da mano depicted by Pinturicchio in the mid–15th centuryClassification
String instrument (plucked)Hornbostel–Sachs classification321.322(Composite chordophone)DevelopedMid-15th centuryRelated instruments
Bowed and plucked string instruments
Sound sample




Vihuela sample

A vihuela playing 'Jamaica' from Playford's The Dancing Master (c.1670)
Problems playing this file? See media help.

The vihuela (Spanish pronunciation: [viˈwela]) is a 15th-century fretted plucked Spanish string instrument, shaped like a guitar (figure-of-eight form offering strength and portability) but tuned like a lute. It was used in 15th- and 16th-century Spain as the equivalent of the lute in Italy and has a large resultant repertory. There were usually five or six[citation needed] doubled strings.
A bowed version, the vihuela de arco (arco meaning bow), was conceived in Spain and made in Italy from 1480. One consequence was the phrase vihuela de mano being thereafter applied to the original plucked instrument. The term vihuela became "viola" in Italian ("viole" in Fr.; "viol" in Eng.), and the bowed vihuela de arco was to serve as a prototype in the hands of the Italian craftsmen for the "da gamba" family of fretted bowed string instruments, as developed starting in 1480. Their vihuela-inherited frets made these easier to play in tune than the rebec family (precursors of the "da braccio" family), and so they became popular for chamber music.


History[edit]
Viola da mano, detail from an engraving by Marcantonio Raimondi, was made before 1510. It depicts poet Giovanni Filoteo Achillini playing the instrument
The vihuela, as it was known in Spanish, was called the viola de mà in Catalan, viola da mano in Italian and viola de mão in Portuguese. The two names are functionally synonymous and interchangeable. In its most developed form, the vihuela was a guitar-shaped instrument with six double-strings (paired courses) made of gut. Vihuelas were tuned identically to their contemporary Renaissance lute; 4ths and one major 3rd (44344, almost like a modern guitar tuning, with the exception of the third string, which was tuned a semitone lower).
Plucked vihuelas, being essentially flat-backed lutes, evolved in the mid-15th century, in the Kingdom of Aragón, located in north-eastern Iberia (Spain). In Spain, Portugal, and Italy the vihuela was in common use by the late 15th through to the late 16th centuries. In the second half of the 15th century, some vihuela players began using a bow, leading to the development of the viol.
There were several different types of vihuela (or different playing methods at least):

Vihuela de mano: 6 or 5 courses played with the fingers
Vihuela de penola: played with a plectrum
Vihuela de arco: played with a bow (ancestor of the viola da gamba)
Tunings for 6 course vihuela de mano (44344): 

G C F A D G
C F B♭ D G C
Although mainstream use of the vihuela has faded away, traces of the complex polyphonic music that was its repertoire in the late 16th century, along with the other primary instrument of the Spanish and Portuguese Renaissance, the cross-strung harp, both of which can be heard in Mexican Mariachi music. The vihuela's descendants that are still played are the violas campaniças of Portugal.  Much of the vihuela's place, role, and function was taken up by the subsequent Baroque guitar (also sometimes referred to as vihuela or bigüela). Currently, the vihuela is in widespread use in Mexican Mariachi music, where its distinctive sound is featured in solos. Additionally, the vihuela is used for the performance of early music, using modern replicas of historical instruments. Today, instruments like the tiple are descendants of vihuelas brought to America in the 16th century.

Construction[edit]
Plucked and bowedSpain, c. 960 a.d. "Cytharas" (identified from text) with players strumming with fingers (de mano) and plucking with plectrum (de penola). From Commentary on the Apocalypse, Morgan Library, Ms 644.Spain, "second third of 10th century".[1] Violas de arco played with a bow. Calling them "de arco" (with bow) indicates that other types exist. From Commentary on the Apocalypse, Codice VITR 14.1.[1]Musicians playing the vihuela (or vielle), one with a bow, the other plucked by hand, in the Cantigas de Santa Maria of Alfonso X of Castile, 13th centuryInstruments from Spain that were labeled cytharas in the manuscripts have resemblances to other later instruments, and the names of these later instruments (coming from different languages) are similar to one another, vihuela, viola, vielle.
Vihuela bodies were lightly constructed from thin flat slabs or pieces of wood, bent or curved as required. This construction method distinguished them from some earlier types of string instruments whose bodies (if not the entire instrument including the neck) were carved out from a solid single block of wood. The back and sides of common lutes were also made of pieces however, being multiple curved or bent staves joined and glued together to form a bowl, made from cypress with a spruce or cedar top.
Vihuela (and violas da gamba) were built in different sizes, large and small, a family of instruments. Duet music was published for vihuelas tuned one step, a minor third, a fourth, or a fifth apart, as well as unison tuned.
The physical appearance of vihuelas was varied and diverse; there was little standardization and no mass production. Overall and in general, vihuelas looked very similar to modern guitars. The first generation of vihuela, from the mid-15th century on, had sharp cuts to its waist, similar to that of a violin. A second generation of vihuela, beginning sometime around 1490, took on the now-familiar smooth-curved figure-eight shaped body contours. The sharp waist-cut models continued to be built into the early-to-mid-16th century, side by side with the later pattern. Many early vihuelas had extremely long necks, while others had the shorter variety. Top decoration, the number, shape, and placement, of sound holes, ports, pierced rosettes, etc., also varied greatly.  More than a few styles of peg-boxes were used as well.
Vihuelas were chromatically fretted in a manner similar to lutes, by means of movable, wrapped-around and tied-on gut frets. Vihuelas, however, usually had ten frets, whereas lutes had only seven.  Unlike modern guitars, which often use steel and bronze strings, vihuelas were gut strung, and usually in paired courses. Gut strings produce a sonority far different from metal, generally described as softer and sweeter.  A six course vihuela could be strung in either of two ways: with 12 strings in 6 pairs, or 11 strings in total if a single unpaired chanterelle is used on the first (or highest pitched) course. Unpaired chanterelles were common on all lutes, vihuelas, and (other) early guitars (both Renaissance guitars and Baroque guitars).

Repertoire[edit]
Orpheus playing a vihuela. Frontispiece from the famous book Libro de música de vihuela de mano intitulado El maestro by Luis de Milán, 1536Example of numeric vihuela tablature from the book Orphenica Lyra by Miguel de Fuenllana (1554). Red numerals (original) mark the vocal part
The first person to publish a collection of music for the vihuela was the Spanish composer Luis de Milán, with his volume titled Libro de música de vihuela de mano intitulado El maestro of 1536 dedicated to King John III of Portugal.  The notational device used throughout this and other vihuela music books is a numeric tablature (otherwise called "lute tablature"), which is also the model from which modern "guitar tab" was fashioned.  The music is easily performed by retuning to Classic lute and vihuela tuning (44344). The tablature system used in all these texts is the "Italian" tablature, wherein the stopped frets are indicated by numbers and the lowest line of the staff represents the highest-pitch course (or string), resembling the neck of the instrument in playing position; Milán's book also uses numbers to indicate the stopping of the courses but exceptionally it is the top line of the staff that represents the highest-pitch course, as in "French" tablature.
The printed books of music for the vihuela which have survived are, in chronological order: 

El Maestro[1] by Luis de Milán (1536)
Los seys libros del Delphin[2] by Luis de Narváez (1538)
Tres Libros de Música[3] by Alonso Mudarra (1546)
Silva de Sirenas[4] by Enríquez de Valderrábano (1547)
Libro de Música de Vihuela[5] by Diego Pisador (1552)
Orphénica Lyra[6] by Miguel de Fuenllana (1554)
El Parnasso[7] by Estevan Daça (1576)
Surviving instruments[edit]
There are three surviving historic vihuelas:[2]

The 'Guadalupe' vihuela in the Musée Jacquemart-André
The 'Chambure' instrument in the Cité de la Musique[3]
A relic of Saint Mariana de Jesús (1618–1645), kept in the Iglesia de la Compañia de Jesús de Quito.
Modern versions of the vihuela continue to be made. Performers adept with the vihuela include the Scottish composer Robert MacKillop,[4] English lutenist Julian Bream[5] and the American artist Hopkinson Smith.

Gallery[edit]



1493, Italy. Italian version of the instrument.


See also[edit]
Mexican vihuela
Bibliography[edit]
Ronald C. Purcell: Classic Guitar, Lute and Vihuela Discography, Belwin-Mills Publishing Corp., Melville, NY, 1976, 116 p., LC: 75-42912 (no ISBN) ("There are more than 100 artists listed as well as approximately 400 composers and 400 individual records.")
Ian Woodfield: The Early History of the Viol, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1984 (includes much early vihuela history; viols are bowed vihuelas)
Notes[edit]
^  The words vihuela and viola are etymologically related.[6]

References[edit]


^ a b "Título uniforme [In Apocalipsin] Title Beati in Apocalipsin libri duodecim". bdh.bne.es. BIBLIOTECA DIGITAL HISPÁNICA. Retrieved 10 December 2016.

^ The surviving instruments section of "12 Vihuela, viola da mano". Catalogue and Price List 2015. Stephen Barber & Sandi Harris.

^ Vihuela de mano, Musée de la musique, Paris.

^ Batov, Alexander (2012). "Vihuela de mano index". Vihuelademano.com. Retrieved 9 June 2013.

^ "Julian Bream A Musical Journey through Spain Part 1access-date=21 June 2021". YouTube. Archived from the original on 12 December 2021.

^ "Vihuela." Real Academia Española, Diccionario de la Real Academia Española, 23d ed. Online. Accessed 25 Dec. 2008.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vihuelas.

Delphin (with vihuela sound samples)
Sociedad de la Vihuela
Lex Eisenhardt, vihuelist
lutesandguitars.co.uk Stephen Barber & Sandi Harris, lutemakers and researchers
vihuelademano.com Alexander Batov, vihuela maker and researcher
Capilla Cayrasco & Camerata Cayrasco, director Eligio Luis Quinteiro
Goldberg magazine: Los dos rinacimintos de la vihuela The 20th-century resurgence of the vihuela
Several photos of Spanish vihuelas can be found among the instrument photos at Wayne Cripps's lute pages.
liuteriadinsieme.it Archived 29 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine Liuteria d'insieme: lutemakers and researchers
Vihuela photos
vteClassical guitar
Guitar
Luthier
Main articles
History
Early recordings
Technique
Repertoire
Strings
Making
Pedagogy
Additional strings
7-string
armónico
Russian
8-string
Brahms
9-string
10-string
Yepes'
11-string
12-string
13-string
14-string
25-string
Related instruments
Flamenco guitar
Harp guitar
Lyre-guitar
Modern classical guitar
Requinto
6-string alto
Early guitars
Baroque guitar
Citole
Cittern
English guitar
Gittern
Guitarra latina
Guitarra morisca
Laúd
Romantic guitar
Vihuela
Lists
Classical guitarists
Composers for the classical guitar
by nationality
Compositions for guitar
International competitions
Bibliography

vteRenaissance musicList of Renaissance composersEarly (1400–1470)
Alexander Agricola
Gilles Binchois
Antoine Busnois
Loyset Compère
Guillaume Du Fay
John Dunstaple
Walter Frye
Heinrich Isaac
Jean Japart
Johannes Martini
Johannes Ockeghem
Leonel Power
Johannes Tinctoris
Gaspar van Weerbeke
Oswald von Wolkenstein
Middle (1470–1530)
Martin Agricola
Antoine Brumel
Thomas Crecquillon
Antonius Divitis
Costanzo Festa
Antoine de Févin
Clément Janequin
Cristóbal de Morales
Jean Mouton
Jacob Obrecht
Josquin des Prez
Pierre de la Rue
John Taverner
Philippe Verdelot
Adrian Willaert
Late (1530)
Jacques Arcadelt
William Byrd
Antonio de Cabezón
Jacobus Clemens
Andrea Gabrieli
Nicolas Gombert
Claude Goudimel
Francisco Guerrero
Claude Le Jeune
Orlando di Lasso
Vicente Lusitano
Pierre de Manchicourt
Hans Neusidler
Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina
Costanzo Porta
Cipriano de Rore
Thomas Tallis
Christopher Tye
Tomás Luis de Victoria
Giaches de Wert
Mannerism and Transition to Baroquec.1600
Gregorio Allegri
Thomas Campion
John Cooper
John Dowland
Girolamo Frescobaldi
Alfonso Fontanelli
Giovanni Gabrieli
Carlo Gesualdo
Orlando Gibbons
Hans Leo Hassler
Alonso Lobo
Luzzasco Luzzaschi
Giovanni de Macque
Luca Marenzio
Claudio Monteverdi
Thomas Morley
Jacopo Peri
Michael Praetorius
Philippe Rogier
Heinrich Schütz
Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck
Composition schools
Burgundian
Colorists
English Madrigal School
English Virginalist School
Florentine Camerata
Franco-Flemish
Roman
Venetian
Musical forms
Carol
Intermedio
Madrigal
Magnificat
Mass
Offertory
Pavane
Traditions
British
Cyprus
Elizabethan
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Music publishing
Hieronymus Andreae
Andrea Antico
Pierre Attaingnant
Vittorio Baldini
Jacob Bathen
Valerio Dorico
Antonio Gardano
Ottaviano Petrucci
Petrus Phalesius the Elder
Girolamo Scotto
Tielman Susato
Thomas Vautrollier
Background
Early music
Renaissance
Art
Architecture
Dance
Literature
Philosophy
 ← Medieval musicBaroque music → 
 Category
 Portal
vteMusic of SpainStyles
Bolero
Catalan rumba
Chirigota
Copla
Cuplé
Endecha
Ensalada
Fandango
Folia
Isa
Jácara
Jota
Muiñeira
New flamenco
Nova Cançó
Pasacalle
Pasodoble
Rock català
Rock urbano
Seguidilla
Sevillana
Tajaraste
Tiento
Tonadilla
Tono humano
Villancico
Xiringüelu
Zarzuela
Género chico
Romani
Flamenco (palos)
Alegrías
Alboreá
Bambera
Bulerías
Cante
Cante jondo
Cantes a palo seco
Cantes libres
Cantiñas
Campanilleros
Cartageneras
Farruca
Flamenco jazz
Garrotín
Granaína
Guajiras
Malagueñas
Martinetes
Peteneras
Polo
Rumba
Saeta
Siguiriyas
Soleá
Soleá por Bulerías
Tango
Tarantas
Tientos
Tonás
Verdiales
Zambra
Romani (Gypsy)
Music by region
Andalusia
Aragon
Balearic Islands
Basque Country
Canary Islands
Castile and Leon
Catalonia
Extremadura
Galicia, Cantabria and Asturias
Murcia
Navarre and La Rioja
Valencia
Music by genre
Spanish folk music
Spanish jazz
Spanish hip hop
Spanish opera
Spanish rock
Music festivals
Benidorm International Song Festival
Eurovision Song Contest
Benidorm Fest
Festival Internacional de Santander
OTI Festival
Musical instruments
Alboka
Bandurria
Castanets
Catalan shawm
Chácaras
Cross-strung harp
Dulzaina
Fiscorn
Flabiol
Gaita gastoreña
Gralla
Guitarra de canya
Guitarro
Kirikoketa
Palmas
Psalterium
Rabel
Tambori
Timple
Trikiti
Txalaparta
Txistu
Vihuela
Viol
Xirula
Zambomba
Gaita
Asturian
de boto
Cabreiresa
Galician
Odrecillo
de saco
Sanabresa
Sac de gemecs
Xeremia
Guitar
Baroque
Classical
Flamenco
Latina
Morisca
Music ensembles
Cobla
Charanga
Chirigota
Comparsa
Rondalla
Tuna

vteLuteTypes by regionAfrica
Goje
Xalam
Asia
Barbat
Bipa
Biwa
Dombra
Dutar
Dramyin
Komuz
Kutiyapi
Oud
Pipa
Qanbūs
Qinqin
Rubab
Sanshin
Sanxian
Sapeh
Setar
Shamisen
Sitar
Tanbur
Tar
Veena
Yueqin
Europe
Angélique
Archlute
Cobza
Kobza
Mandore
Mandora
Swedish lute
Torban
Theorbo
Vihuela
Related instruments
Citole
Cittern
English guitar
Gittern
Guitarra latina
Guitarra morisca
Laúd
Other topics
Composers
Manufacturers
Players
 Commons
Authority control databases NationalGermanyCzech RepublicOtherMusicBrainz instrument




Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vihuela&oldid=1260961425"
Categories: Guitar family instrumentsEarly musical instrumentsSpanish musical instrumentsSpanish words and phrasesNecked box lutesHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from August 2021Articles needing additional references from April 2021All articles needing additional referencesArticles with hAudio microformatsPages with Spanish IPAAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2016Pages using multiple image with auto scaled imagesCommons category link is locally definedWebarchive template wayback links






 This page was last edited on 3 December 2024, at 14:57 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view














Search













Search









Toggle the table of contents







Vihuela




























28 languages


Add topic
















